Auntie, good morning!
Good morning!
How are you now?
I'm fine.
How was your night?
We thank God.
Hope you slept well?
Ah, my sister, I slept well.
You had electricity in your area last night?
We didn't.
Ah, what happened now?
It's NEPA.
Aha, these people, I heard that they share the light.
My sister, it's tiring.
Eh!
They share it yet they bring overestimated bills.
Our ah...
In fact, that bill is another thing again.
That it is, my sister.
How much do they... how much... how much did they charge you on the bill?
Ah, my sister, it's seven thousand.
Jesus!
Seven thousand for the light we don't have?
That's right!
Ah, these people... eh, they won't kill someone.
My sister.
How are you managing?
How is your business?
My sister, I'm managing.
Thank God.
Eyah, God will help us.
Amen!
There is one...
There is a kind of dish that Mama Maro taught me.
The dish is good.
I heard that it's an Ibo dish.
Uhuh?
Uhuh?
Ehn!
I know you'll like it.
Teach me too.
Hope you know banga soup?
I know banga soup.
Ehn... it's the soup.
Okay!
So, it's like I'll come so you and I can do it.
Okay!
The dish will be good.
You'll like it a lot.
Okay!
Or should I give it to you?
So...
Like can you tell me how they...
Do you know how they prepare the dish?
Ah, my sister... my younger sister taught me how they cook it.
Can you tell me a little?
She said...
She said you'll parboil the banga.
Uhuh.
After you've parboiled it, then you'll pound it.
Yes?
When you pound it, you filter it.
Then, you add your ingredients.
That's how my sister taught me.
Okay.
You like...
You ch-... which... as in which food... like what do you eat it with?
Hey! My sister, I like...
Is it starch or eba?
I like starch a lot.
Oh, good!
Starch hm, starch is what I like.
haha.
F-... starch is what goes well with it.
Uh, that's what I like the most.
Okay now!
Alright.
This morning, what did you eat before you came here?
Ah, my sister, well, I ate eba!
Hey eba?
Hehe, why didn't you drink tea?
Hm, my sister, I don't really like tea.
Okay.
Who now?
Swallow is what I like the most.
What did you eat before you went to bed?
Ah, well, my sister, I just ate a litle rice.
Okay.
Hm.
I hope the rice was tasty?
It was tasty, aha!
Okay.
So, any, any news?
Did you hear any news about this place?
Ah! My sis-...
Concerning this NEPA issue of ours, I heard that they said they want to come and disconnect the power tomorrow.
My sister, that is how I heard it.
They said, they want to come and disconnect the power tomorrow.
Please!
They shouldn't come because we are tired of them!
Even me, I don't have money to pay.
This is a problem.
That everywhere is dry, there is no money.
I just pray that they don't come.
Ah, please!
Don't let them come!
Because if they come, it means it's the whole area that will have their lights disconnected.
That's it.
Because people don't have money.
Because there is no money.
And we don't see any light.
At all.
Please!
Hm NEPA should not try us.
I'm not sure that they will even come.
Haha.
Ma'am, I want you and me to go to the market next market day.
Okay!
Gwagwalada Market or Kwali?
First we'll go to Kw-...
What day is Kwali Market?
Hm, it's tomorrow.
Tomorrow?
Uhuh!
Ah, we'll try to go.
What do you want to go buy?
There are some kind...
I want to go buy my shop items.
There are some things that I need in my shop.
I want you and me to go.
Like what?
Like shampoo...
Because you won't see provisions there.
It's true.
Will I see shampoo and attach?
My sister, you won't see any.
It's food products they have.
Food products?
Ah!
Alright.
That means wo-...
If we go, we'll just buy ingredients that we use to cook some dishes.
Okay now.
When I want to go, I'll come call you.
Okay, no problem.
I'll be at home waiting for you.
No problem then.
Me too, let me go hustle for money so that if we go I can buy enough things.
No problem!
I'll call you.
Okay, no problem.
Your number that you gave me last week, it's still the number you're using, right?
It's what I still use.
X sometimes, I try to call the number.
The number doesn't connect.
It's the network.
Ah, this network again!
Okay then.
I'll give you my number before we leave here.
No problem then!
I'm expecting it.
What church do you go to?
My sister, it's CAC.
CAC?
Hm.
You've left Pathfinders?
Hm, mtschew, I've left.
I go to CAC now.
How is the church?
Ah, we thank God.
Hope that they preach well?
Yes, they preach well.
Do you have any program?
As in any upcoming program?
Uh... we have one on the third... the third uh... Friday of the month.
Eh.
We are having a night vigil.
Okay, a night vigil?
Uhuh!
Hope the vigil is exciting.
Ah, my sister, it is no joke.
If you come, you will see.
I'll try.
I will try to come.
Come then!
Me too, I'll invite you to mine.
No problem!
We have a women's program.
If you come, you'll enjoy it a lot.
No problem!
Definitely!
I'll come.
They'll teach you lots of things. How to take care of your home. How to cook for your family. In fact, how to manage your home.
Eyah!
And they will still teach you some things like, how to prepare some things in your house.
Okay!
I'll come!
You'll enjoy it a lot.
Okay!
I do like that type of program.
Ah, you'll enjoy it.
I will come.
I will come.
Let's pray for God to keep us until that day.
Amen, my sister.
That's it.
Thank you!
God will help us.
Good morning, guys.
How are you?
How was your night?
Hope you slept well.
How...
My name is Charity, anyway.
I'm from Delta State.
I'm from Delta State, but this is where my mom and dad had me.
So it's here that I... I grew up in Abuja.
And my parents, they always brought people back home.
They didn't take me with them when they went back home.
I always...
This is where I stayed.
This is where I grew up.
So this is where I even went to school.
I didn't finish, by the way, because of some kind of... I had no money.
So, I am just at home.
Then I learned hairdressing.
So now, I plait hair for my neighbours, and that's how I get by, how I get myself f-... get myself certain things because I don't like to disturb my mother since she doesn't have any money either.
Everyone's working hard to get by.
My dad, my father isn't here.
He's in Benin right now, anyway.
He works there.
So again, mtschew, this our, mtschew, Abuja life, it's not so easy.
Things are difficult here now.
Things are difficult in Nigeria.
There is no money.
People are suffering.
In fact, things are really expensive in the market.
If you go to the market, the things you see that you would have bought last year for let's say uh... two hundred naira, now cost six hundred, seven hundred naira.
In fact, just to eat now, if you don't have a job, you are on your own.
You will suffer.
People are hungry.
Even me I'm saying that God has helped me.
As I was working in my salon, God helped me out.
Then I was admitted.
In fact, I was even crying to God, why did you get me accepted when I have no money?
Uh... there is no money.
For my registration, there is no money.
My dad, for almost three months, almost four months now, has not been paid.
We're just barely getting by at home.
In fact, just feeding yourself isn't easy.
And now, I'm about to start university too.
I don't know how my university even works.
I was just praying for God to open some doors for me.
God should help me.
And I'm just praying for this country.
God should just make a way for this country.
This country should go back to the way it was before.
Because we are tired.
How could we be in... what we say norm-... there is no money.
Nothing at all.
Mtschew, in fact, I'm tired of this country.
Okay, you even opened a salon to work.
People...
No money!
People... customers will come and ask for low prices.
When things in the market are expensive.
They will ask for low prices.
Some, even if you treat them well, won't pay you.
What?
Why... why...
What... what are we...
Where... where are we going in this country?
Where are we going?
Anyway, we just need the hand of God.
We just need God to help us, because, in fact, without God's help, we don't know where we're going.
Brothers and sisters, as you hear my voice, wherever you are, whatever you're doing, you should put God first.
God should come first.
Because God, He comes first.
Without God, you're on your own, because if not, if you don't have God, you'll suffer.
You'll suffer.
Also, whatever you do, make sure you work hard.
If you work hard, you will not go hungry, you won't know hunger.
Well, what happened to me before, what happened to me before which I remember and can't forget, and which in fact was God... it's God, He is the one who did it, it is my school stuff... it's my school.
Because as I was doing my hairdressing and taking the JAMB, I wasn't failing but I wasn't going to get in either.
I prayed.
Mtschew, but in fact, it got to a time when... I just took my mind away from it saying maybe God doesn't want me to go to school again, or I'm not meant to go to school.
So, then the last time I sat for JAMB... the last time I wrote JAMB, I didn't get in.
I waited and waited.
All the schools had started classes.
I was at home.
Everyday, I was thinking.
Why didn't I get in?
What is all this?
Mtschew, that was when I said well, let me just forget about it.
I even went to look for a job.
As I looked for a job, I was working then, the day I had worked for exactly two weeks, because everybody I had... who... everybody who promised me they would help me for my admission, they told me not to worry, not to worry
They would...
By any means, they would definitely help me.
School started, lectures started, no news, nothing at all.
I said, well, maybe I won't get in...
In fact, I'll forget about school.
I won't take the JAMB again.
Let me just do my work.
Let me just keep doing my work at home.
For God who loves me, I didn't know if God still liked me.
The day I finished two weeks at the shop I was working at, I got a call, an unexpected call from an unexpected person.
They said "hello, is this Charity, is this Charity I am speaking to?"
I said yes.
They said, "please, come to the school right now, come and get your admission letter, you've been accepted."
Ha, I said "me, how come?"
They said "hurry up and come, you could even start classes today, really."
That was how I just...
My boss wo..., my boss I was working with, he was just happy for me that... wow!
He even gave me the transport fare saying I should go to school right away.
When I got to school, you can't imagine the line to get the admission letter.
I was there wondering "How will I even get this admission letter?"
Even if I wanted to get the admission letter, I wouldn't be able to today!
Mtschew!
But I said well, first let me go see the person who asked me to come.
So I went to her office.
Then she said "Oh, Charity, I have been looking for your number!
Thank God you came today!
In fact, you have have been admitted.
Okay, sit down in my office, sit down in this chair.
Make yourself comfortable.
I will give you whatever you need.
Let me go and get your admission letter for you."
This woman just went... went to the place where they were getting the admission letters.
She did everything for me.
Got my admission letter and brought it to me.
She even got the receipt for my school fees which would have been a pain to get.
You could wait in line for a week and still not get your receipt.
But this woman went and got my admissions letter for me, got my receipt for me and brought them back to me like I was the president's kid.
She brought them over and said "take your admission letter, take your receipt, you can go pay your school fees, you can even got to class today. Go and check your timetable, maybe you have a lecture now you can attend".
I just said "oh, God, this God is too wonderful ah."
I don't even know how I can thank God.
In fact, this thing God did for me, I am not sure I could ever in my life be able to forget it.
Ah!
I just...
When I just finished uh... taking my SSCE exam, so, when I finished taking my SSCE, I was there looking for a job, uh...
After I finished that SSCE, I was looking for some menial job to do.
So, I started uh...
Sometimes, I joined some people working on construction sites and helped them.
I now...
One day, I thought to myself, man.
This isn't what you do if you wanna get somewhere in life.
Because this isn't skilled labor.
Then, I called one of my older brothers who was in Lagos at the time.
I told him, "man is it good to be a skilled worker."
Sometimes you can...
If someone...
If you're a skilled worker, you can still use that to get by if school doesn't work out.
So, he told me OK, go find somewhere you can pick up a skill.
So, I arrived, I started going up and down the streets of Gwagwalada looking for something to do, so I could maybe learn the skills.
So, any place I went, they would ask me for a lot of money. Wherever I went, they would ask me for a lot of money.
So, I went to a place.
That's when I met the man.
I talked with him.
I told him "oga, this your luck, uh... work, I like it, I want to know more about it."
He asked if I wanted to learn it.
I said yes.
He said OK.
So what now?
I told him "me, I want to learn it."
I want to know uh... our agreement.
Uh... how much he'll take to teach me his job.
So he said "OK, no problem."
He'd teach me his job for about ten thousand naira.
I said "OK, no problem."
I went to call my people.
"Let's sign, OK?"
He said I should bring malta, or soft drinks and cookies, which I did.
So, at the end of the day, I started learning the work.
I spent a year and six months learning the job.
After I learned the job for a year and six months, I realized I'd mastered it.
I then called him, Oga, and said what you're gonna do now is let me go.
At least, I should also be independent like you, who's feeding your own family.
He said OK, no problem since the, the, my time with you has, has, has finished, he will let me go with some money.
So I kept working for him for like two or three months before he let me go, so that makes a year and eight months.
Uh... so a year and uh... nine mon-, uh... ten months.
So, when I se-, he let me go with some money, I started to hustle on my own, going from one site to another.
Even as I was going to different sites, I thought that, man, as soon as you finished learning the job, you'd be a millionaire.
I didn't know that when you learn this work, hehe, you can forget about that!
That's when you find out that no, no, no, life's no piece of cake.
So, that was how I started hustling to get by.
I was going from one site to the next, telling them, giving them my business card.
Uh... I'm an aluminum technician.
I do this, I design these windows.
I know how to design these windows.
I do this uh, uh... sliding net, case, casement, open and swing doors.
They'd say OK, no problem.
Life in our line of work isn't... it's not easy.
So, the first time there was a contract that I got, that they...
Somebody just called me.
It was my friend's dad.
As he called me, thinking he would help me out, I billed him almost sixty thousand naira for a work worth a hundred thousand because I needed the money.
I said "OK, give me sixty thousand naira."
Eventually, he gave me forty thousand naira.
I bought a lot of materials.
Eventually, I finished the work.
There was twenty thousand naira left.
The...
When the guy saw that I had done the work, he refused to pay up.
So, I thought about it, well.
This guy is my friend's father, you know.
What can I do?
I couldn't face, face him and stand up to him.
I forgot about it.
As time went on, I was still there, hustling on different sites.
If I saw a small job to do, I took it.
At times, I'd do jobs in the area, in the area, that weren't even in my field, just to put food on the table and get by in life.
Because I know life isn't easy.
So when man... when God created huma-, man... as men, we have a lot of things to face. We have a heavy cross to bear.
So, that's it.
So much that even last year, when they called me for a job, I did it.
When I finished the job, the guy told me there were some problems with the work I did.
So much that he wanted to get out of paying me.
I called him.
Oga, there's no, no problem with the work.
Call uh... some aluminium technicians now, let them take a look.
Eventually, he went and called some aluminium technicians behind my back.
They told him there were no problems with the work.
So later on he admitted that the work was fine.
So later, he paid me my money.
That's the money I used to do something for myself.
I put some on...
So that that even recently, one of my friends handed one of his sites over for me to manage.
So the site, I'm mana-... I'm managing it.
To the extent again that I've just become become the site engineer, supervising the building.
And I know that, when the time comes, at least, he will give those, those aw-, ar-, ar-, windows to me.
I will do them.
I will do them.
I will survive.
That's it.
In this life, becoming a man isn't easy.
So one of the interesting things about journalism is that they say, they say that even when you have issues you want to discuss, people's attitude can bring out another issue which can lead to another story entirely.
So, okay, uh... I remember the time the Americans wanted to hold their election.
That was two thousand and eight, that time they wanted...
Obama ran.
And fortunately, I was one of the journalists that went to cover what happened there.
So, as I travelled, I started uh... I started to interview one, two, three people.
And I noticed the issue everybody was discussing was Obama, Obama.
The young people, that time, everybody I spoke with, (whether white, black, or Asian), everyone was talking about Obama.
But the old folks weren't interested.
And I wondered why.
Why aren't you interested.
Because they said...
There was an old man I asked, he said it would... it wouldn't make any difference.
That is is just normal excitement.
Everybody is just happy.
That well, a new person, a black man, and all that!
But at the end of the day, it's like most of the old people were just not interested.
Because they said mstchew, we have done this kind... this kind of thing before.
That's how it is.
A new person will come, everybody will be shouting hey hey hosanna but when things get serious nothing will change.
So, I just saw at that time, a lot of young people were interested.
I went to New York, I went to uh... Texas, I went to Washington.
Most of the young people in America at that time, they wanted to vote.
Many of them, had never voted in their life.
So to them, it was an interesting opportunity.
It was the first time.
And many of them who voted that time, did it because of the internet.
It was the internet that gi-... brin-... motivated them to vote.
Because before, many of them, you know it was on TV, radio, everybody was talking but that time when Obama came, he started this idea of a Facebook campaign.
Vote for me, donate for me, support me.
Everybody, young people, high school students, people who are just entering university, polytechnic.
Everybody got together.
They gave him the votes.
So, it was at that time that I realized social media was a powerful tool.
And it is one of those things that hepled the guy win the election.
As we can see now, everywhere we go, social media is powerful.
Even if you look, yesterday, on social media, Facebook, the main thing everybody was talking about was DNA.
DNA.
D-...
I don’t know who started that discussion.
Until this morning, everybody was talking about it.
Because...
I then asked what started that discussion.
They said it was because a guy discovered the four children he had, were not his.
Those children however, had already become adults.
So, the debate started.
Everybody!
Some, some people are asking if it is good for a man to have, to go test his children?
Should he... should he... should he confirm that those children are his?
Some people say it's unAfrican.
Don't do that kind of thing!
It is... it... it... it's not in our culture.
Some people say "Why? Why can't we do it?"
So, social media is a very powerful tool that can make or break anybody.
I was staying with my mother in the village.
So we always went to the farm.
So we...
As we went to the farm, we'd been staying on the farm for a long time.
So, there's one of our brothers... one of our...
Because I never met my father, my father had died.
Before I grew up, my father had died, I didn't meet him.
So there are five of us in our family.
Before I grew up, my father had died.
So there, one of our paternal uncles, he was the one we were helping go, go to the farm.
When we helped him with the work, he would, would pay us.
So that was how we were working.
I was working.
I was gathering money, little by little.
As we were gathering money, little by little, then we said, "well, okay, we've gathered enough money."
"Let's try to put..."
"If it's our older brother, let's put him in school."
"Let him go to school."
So if we put him in school, he was not...
He didn't agree to go to school, he would run away from school.
He would come back to stay home.
So, that was how my mother did, did it.
One of our maternal aunts who was in town, who was in Edo, she said we should come, we should pack our things and come meet her.
Then all of us packed and went.
So, that woman's place was where we were staying.
So none of us were going to school.
So, for me, it was second hand clothes I was selling.
We went to sell second hand clothes, we went to carry loads.
We would pack uh... second hand clothes in the market.
All those people who carry bags of rice, that was where we brought it in the market.
So, I was saving money.
Then I said I should use it to go to Abuja, to start schooling.
So, as I was saving the money, my sis... our older brother, he didn't listen to anyone.
He was involved in a fight.
So as he was... he went to fight, his... (I don't know where he went to fight at a party), his hand was wounded.
One of his hands was wounded.
So, there was only one hand he could use.
So, he wasn't... he wasn't able to do anything.
He just turned into a liability.
So, he was just staying in the house.
Any money we made from work, any money anybody worked for, some would go to carrying second hand clothes.
We would go work and come give them there.
That was how we were doing.
We kept going.
Then I said, "well, let me get a little something together and come to Abuja, to start learning, whether a trade or in school."
That was how we started schooling.
From there, I came here.
One of my uh... my... our cousin's brother put me in JSS One.
So I continued on.
Mstchew, the school didn't... the school didn't go well with my...
As in, anything they taught me, I just didn't...
It's not school.
I didn't... I just didn't want to go to school.
So that was how we were.
We were there, we were getting by.
Like if he forced me to go to school, I wouldn't go.
So, one day, one of my friends told me that this school that they kept forcing me to go to, if I didn't want to learn, if I didn't want to go to school, I didn't have to.
I should leave there and we should go work.
Then I said, "well, okay, let's go work."
Then we went to where they do aluminum.
It was a shop.
We went to that place.
I went to that place.
The guy... the guy had lots... the guy had almo-... about sixteen boys, and the place was really big.
I was older than all of them, but they would be sending me to go...
Where they sent me to pack tools, the place was really far.
Then I said I wasn't going to keep going.
So I left.
So, then they took me to a tailor.
To a tailor's shop again, where I was... where I would learn tailoring.
The man... it was men's clothes I wanted to learn, but he only sewed women's clothes.
So then I said, "well, I can't be sewing women's clothes."
Then I said, "well, let me leave."
So, I wanted to go and learn carpentry.
So, it was carpentry I was learning.
As I was learning carpentry, I was beginning to grasp... I was understanding little by little.
So, they called me from the village saying that my mother was sick.
They called us from the village saying that our mother was sick.
Then we said "well, since she's sick, what will we do?"
Then we said "well, all the money we've saved, we should bring it to her."
So that was what we did.
Then we hustled, got money and went to give it to her.
So then they, they operated on her.
It was fibroid she had.
So then they operated on her.
Then they... we were at home, then they...
On Easter Sunday, it was exactly on Easter Sunday, they called us saying we should come to the village.
Our mother had died.
So all of us packed our things and went to the village.
Then we saw that our mother had indeed died.
So that was it.
Before we did, mo-... there wasn't even money for the burial.
It was just...
It was because my mother's church...
Since she was a women's leader in their church, they did everything.
They were... they were the ones who bought the coffin, they did everything.
So that was how we left.
As I got to town, I was working.
The person I was working with, if I... if we went to work, I would be the one to do the work.
He would...
Before I went, he would go... he would go behind me to collect the money, he would spend everything, he would say they hadn't paid him.
If I finished the work, I would go and ask the guy.
The guy would say he had taken the money.
That the... my boss had taken it.
My boss had spent it... spent all the money.
I went to meet my boss.
My boss would... boss would say he hadn't taken the money.
So then we'd start to argue.
Then I said (I haven't forgotten), "let me leave this place."
Then I went to another shop.
So that's where I was working.
The guy and I were working.
The guy pays me while I work.
The guy... me and the guy would... the guy paid me for the work I did.
Then my sister said our parents' last child...
As it is, I'm a twin, that's why they named me Odion.
I'm a twin.
My twin sister called to say well, as it was, right then, she wanted to start school.
Saying she can't...
She was...
Because she was a woman, she wanted to go to school.
Then I said, "well, we'll put some money together for you to put you in school."
So we got some money together.
We put some money together.
All the work I did, if I did any job, I would save three thousand naira.
That was how we went on.
Then we put my younger sister in school.
She sat for the WAEC.
As my younger sister took the WAEC, she took it, but she didn't have money to...
She took the JAMB too, but...
She passed her exams.
She scored two hundred and ninety.
That was what she scored, but there was no money to, to proceed.
That was why she...
That is what made her stay at home since last year.
She sat for the WAEC.
She wrote the JAMB.
That's why she's at home now.
There's nothing to do.
So I'm working.
I then came to X, X, X, Agwan-... Agwandodo.
I was working with one guy.
The guy and I were working at that place.
So anytime we worked, the guy would always give money; anytime we worked, the guy would give money.
So since I was at that place, my cousin's brother who I stayed with in Abuja behind Specialist, told me uh... as it was, he could no longer feed me.
I should please go... I should pack my things.
I should go back.
Then I said "ah ah, why are you acting like that, you were the one who asked me to stay."
He said it didn't concern him.
As it was, he could no longer feed me.
Well, I said, "well, okay, let me go back to the village."
Then I said, "well, okay, as it is, I don't have anybody in the village, I don't have a father, I don't have a mother, I can't just go to the village."
I then went to s-...
There was one, one of our guards who stayed in the shop.
Then I went and joined the, the guy to stay in the shop.
So as I joined and was staying with the guy, it was from there, I joined him to guard.
Then I saved up some money.
Then I went and rented a house.
So that's where I'm staying now.
So, I'm even working.
Work is what brought me to this place.
I work for Fidelity Bank.
So that's where we're working.
Then they said well okay, that place, they want to sell the land.
They wanted to sell that land.
All of us should pack and leave that place.
We should go find out where to stay.
That was how they did it.
Then they had a dispute over the matter.
They couldn't sell the land anymore.
So, that's how we were still at that place working until now.
My boss had been planning to travel out.
I knew if he travelled out, I'd be the one he'd leave in that shop.
His wife didn't agree.
Then the wife went to bring her younger brother.
The wife just brought her younger brother from the village.
He's the one who's staying in the shop now.
So, my boss has travelled out now.
He travelled out last month.
So, that's it, we're engaged in a battle.
Any... anything you do, it's... it's the woman who will...
She's the one who will collect all the money.
So, then I told the woman, "well, as it is, I..."
"Since I've finished learning the trade, let me graduate."
"I want to leave."
"I will..."
The woman said I can't leave.
I have to... I have to work there.
I then said, "what?"
"What else will I be doing there?"
"The person who was teaching me has left, and I've finished learning the work."
"What do you want me to be doing there?"
She said no.
So me, I must stay.
For seven years, I should...
Then I said, "what am I...?"
"Seven years, who will be teaching me the trade?"
"I'll be here with nobody to teach me the trade."
"My boss has travelled out and you're a woman."
"You can't be... you can't be where I am."
"Who do I want...?"
"Wha-... who wants to teach me the work?"
She said no.
That me, I had to stay.
Then I said, "well, ma'am, if that's so, I'm not staying anymore."
So I left and was doing jobs for people.
When I work, they give me two thousand naira... when I work, they give me one thousand.
So, I was using that to feed myself and clothe myself.
So that's how I, for all my life, how I'm doing.
There's only one girl out of all of us who has gotten into school now.
The rest are still in the village.
So, for me, as we are, it's money I'm looking for so that I... (if I can save a little something), so that I can just help my sister so that... (if it's school that she wants to go to), so that she can go to school.
So that's how it is.
I just came to the shop this morning.
My friend said we should go eat.
I said well, myself, I don't have the money to spend on food.
He said we should go.
I said this is the last two hundred naira on me, and you want us to spend it on food, right?
I said he knows that business is slow.
He said we should go eat.
And so we went to eat.
When we finished eating, he said I should take him to Wazobia Park, he wants to buy some stuff.
I said aha again, I don't have fuel for the bike.
He said I shouldn't worry, he would buy me fuel, we will go.
We bought fuel.
And that's how we left.
We went to buy the goods.
As we were coming, this, uh, highway... we wanted to pass the highway, so a lot of bikers were there, and you had to climb.
Before you climb, you have to pass through the place.
I didn't know that my guy, he was sitting down, he was carrying goods.
He was carrying goods.
I didn't know that he was not sitting properly.
And so, I moved, I stopped, I moved, I stopped.
When it was time to climb and keep moving, I just didn't see my guy again.
I didn't know that he had fallen off and was on the ground way back, and myself, I was far away.
After I had crossed, so I had to turn back.
Then I saw him carrying goods.
I, I didn't even know that anybody got off my motorbike.
I just saw him carrying goods and standing at the back.
So I said, "okay, well, let me turn back and meet him."
He said no, I should just stay where I was.
That was how he went carrying the goods, he stopped another bike and was going.
As if...
What did I do wrong?
Did I screw up?
Me, I didn't know that he fell on the ground.
And me, I...
And because the place was high up, he was on my back.
So he fell as I moved.
People told me he had fallen.
And I had...
That place is a busy place.
I had to be careful, so that nothing would hit my bike, or something.
That's how I turned.
Then we met at the shop.
He was telling people that uh... that I, I don't know how to ride a bike.
That's how it is, I ride the motorbike anyhow, he fell, etc., etc., etc.
That's why he didn't ride my bike on the way back to the shop.
I said well, no problem.
That's how I laid the matter to rest, then I moved on.
I don't know if I did something wrong.
There's this boss of mine who trained me.
So everytime myself, and another guy, we always go to his house.
We used to go.
Like... sometimes, we would buy bottles of beer, and we would drink.
I used to look at this guy.
In the morning, before he went to work, he would just come, he would buy bottles of beer, he would drink as much as he wanted, and we, we would be in his house aha.
Then, I asked...
In, in the evening, we would still be there, in his house.
He would still come back.
That's how he would buy drinks.
He would drink, I mean enjoy himself.
Then I was asking my guy, "ah, this guy, what kind of work does he do?"
So he told me that...
Because then, I didn't even know what they called car AC (Air Conditioning).
I only knew that cars had AC.
Do you understand?
So I should have asked my...
Because I just completed my ND (National Diploma) then.
But it's not that I actually finished the programme.
Based on one or two issues, I only left the place over finance, and some other things.
I only left the school so I wouldn't get into the wrong hands, or something.
I just left the school, I came back.
So I went to join the...
So I went to Zuba to stay with one of my friends.
So we started going to that guy's place.
Now, he told me that the guy worked on car AC.
I said, "what is car AC?"
He said AC for motor cars.
So I said, "ehen."
He said...
I said, "where is the guy's shop?"
He said it was where they sell spare parts for cars.
I said ehn.
I said okay but mstchew, that car AC... me, I'd like to get some experience in that area.
Because me, I am a technical person.
Because I was in the Engineering department from SS (Senior Secondary School) one to SS three.
Doing Electrical Electronics.
You understand?
And for my... and for my ND (National Diploma), I was in Electrical Engineering.
So he said that t-... not at all.
That mstchew... that... my friend said no.
That I wouldn't be able to do it because me I'm above that.
That uh... he sees me as a big boy.
That me, I wouldn't be able to do it.
I said, "man, in this life, you've gotta be smart
I mean, you have to be loyal.
I mean, you have to be humble to get what you want.
So he told me that well, he'd go see the guy.
So I said okay.
The next day, I went up to him and said we should go and see the guy.
He said he wanted to go somewhere.
So me, I walked to the guy's house.
And I said "boss..."
I greeted him.
He said, "yes."
So we chatted since he knew me.
He saw me around from time to time.
They have even told hima about me.
Then he told me that...
I told him, "man, I heard you work on car AC, mstchew."
I'm interested in that line of work since I've noticed how you're doing.
I want to get an idea.
Then he laughed.
And he said, "hh."
But he heard that me, I'm an electrician.
That I... I went attended the polytechnic.
I told him I attended the polytechnic but I didn't finish the program, but I n-... I need to get busy.
Daily activities and things like that, you know?
Then he said, "well, no problem at all."
He said well, since I... since I came on my own, he believed I could do it.
Since I understood technical things, he believed I could do it.
I said I will.
He said okay, I should come and meet him in the shop the next day.
So I went to meet him in the shop the next day.
From that day on I went to meet him in the shop, he started observing me, he was observing my attitude.
He was wondering if mstchew, I'd be showing him lip or whether...
He would hand me errands he wasn't supposed to give me.
He would notice that I did them.
Then one day, I just came to work.
It's not that I got there really late.
He asked me to kneel down at the gate
And said I should crawl from there until I get inside the garage.
So I... so I kneeled down right there
And I started crawling towards him.
I was crawling towards him.
That was how...
He c-...
Someone said "ah, Chris!"
He said they they sin-... they asked me to stand up.
When I stood up, later, later in the day, another guy in charge of mechanics said "uh, Christopher"... he said your boss shouldn't...
He said I should...
That I shouldn't be angry about what my boss did in the morning.
He said my boss just wanted...
That was two weeks after I joined him.
He said my boss just wanted to test me.
Maybe I'd show him an attitude.
Maybe I'd be stubborn.
I told him that no, I can't do that.
Because when you wanted to get trained for something... you submitted yourself as an apprentice.
Your... you will... you have to be loyal.
You can't show attitude or say anything.
So the next day, my boss asked me to go and bring my training fee, come with drinks and afterwards sign the apprenticeship form.
That was how I signed the apprenticeship form and continued till I got myself a shop and started hustling here in Gwagwalada.
Ah, babe, how are you?
Um, fine.
How are you?
Eh!
Ahah, what you're doing like this, you're just locking up as if nothing is happening.
Aren't you in Nigeria?
I'm fine, I'm fine.
I'm just coming from the road where I saw like small small, small, small children who, as in who are in secondary school, who were like eight years old, they'll be in JSS3.
Ahah!
Uhuh!
Aha!
I just don't know what's happening to this country or if it's all over the world this thing happened.
I just don't know what's happening to this country.
Ah, man, but what you're saying is like...
I don't know.
I'm telling you.
Aren't you Nigerian?
Before that, at the time when we were uh... uh... when we were with our parents, our mother and father, a'ah then, it was old mo-... mo-... mo-... mo-... mothers that were, that were even in primary school.
Well!
Uhuh.
You mean mom and dad, our mothers, our mothers!
Not even secondary school.
Haha.
I remember when I was little, when I was little.
What happened?
Because I was good at school!
From primary four (I was still seven at the time), one day, then my father just... my father just came to the school.
Hm.
My uh... teacher met him, told him that... uh... that I, I... I'm good at school, I'm very good, that he should buy the uh... uh... uh... (what's it called again?) Common Entrance Examination, that I will pass.
Aha!
Since I was good at school, he went to buy it.
I passed the exam, I went to school, oh boy!
Ah!
If you see suffering...
You have a high level.
My own father doesn't behave like that.
Hm!
Oh boy, forget it!
That's what I'm saying.
You're not supposed to be too young when you go into Secondary School now.
O-...
Ah!
I said I... I didn't even know how to take care of myself.
Ha!
Anytime we had visiting day, my mama would cry because at the time, I didn't know how to take care of myself.
Eh!
Hm!
Those people they call uh... mtchew, uh... school mothers... school mothers, yes that's what they call them.
Uh, ma... mom... mom... school moms.
Eh, okay.
Yes now.
The lady, she ate all my provisions.
It was no small thing!
My milk, everything.
Shoot!
I wasn't even staying in the hostel.
Eh!
After we read at night for homework, I slept in class.
Aha!
Haha.
I would carry my uniform like that to class.
I wasn't able to take a shower.
Uhuh!
So you stayed in a boarding house.
I stayed in a boarding house.
That's what I'm saying.
Eh!
All these children shouldn't, as in, think that they want to go fast.
At least, everything should be gradual.
How to manage?
But it is not people's fault like that now.
It's because of...
Isn't it... aren't they... isn't it... isn't it our fault? Isn't it our fault?
Let me tell you something, for you to know a thing or two.
They are spoiling Nigeria, they are spoiling this country.
I'm telling you!
Everybody, everything has to go step by step.
See...
It's not all about being hasty.
Look at money! They want to be hasty about it, you want to be impatient about it.
If it's on the road, everybody wants to go fast; if it's e-... e-... exa-... e-... examination, everybody wants to get something quick.
If it's uh...
Everything is...
What is life?
Nigerians, we just don't have patience at all.
I am telling you!
But what do you think about it?
So, babe, I will tell you the truth.
Leave the matter for Mathias.
Eh, it's not what you're saying.
It's not that...
You see, let... let me tell you in case you don't know.
The thing is spoiling us, it's spoiling us, I'm telling you.
See, Nigeria's challenge, it is...
That one is too much.
Ha!
Eh, it is too much.
But the thing is that Nigeria makes people smart.
If you're not smart, you'll get smart quick.
That's how Nigeria is for us.
Let me tell you!
What makes people act like that is that they need to just try to, for them to try to meet up to certain things.
If you don't run it, if you don't run the package like that uh... you will just... you will crash there.
You'll even see a ki-... kid who doesn't even know how to speak will be in the nursery... in the nursery class.
What now?
Come on!
That's how it is now.
For what?
That is how it is, but... be... but... but let me tell you.
We're always rushing things in Nigeria.
I'm telling you.
We are rushing too much.
It's not good, it's not good.
Ah, but we will... we need to rush it now.
Aha!
We are not supposed to be rushing things.
That's why the white people themselves are lying... are afraid of us.
Aha!
That's why they are afraid of us.
Even if we stay on the road, you will see traffic lights.
Where are you r-...?
It's not like you're rushing anywhere.
You'll just want to speed away.
If the police come to handle you now, they'll be saying "please, I don't have any money, what..."
I don't have any, I don't have any, I don't have any, but you're the one who doesn't, who doesn't have any patience in this country.
I am telling you!
Which, which police?
It's no good, it's no good.
Which of the police are you talking about?
Is it this kind of police that we have here that you're talking about?
Which police?
But now, you know that sometimes, some... most of these police, they are doing all these, uh... uh... uh... road uh... transport work, all of them.
They are doing something.
They have...
Some... some... some of them are good of course, some of them are good.
Do you want to say they are already adjusting?
Please don't let me spoil my country.
Some of them are good, some of them are good, some of them are good.
But just the ones I met now, they are fucked up.
I'm telling the truth.
That one does not...
In Nigeria here, everything uh... even those Adigo police that you are talking about, they are the ones that hurt you the most.
Sometimes, you wonder.
They say the police are your friend.
What kind of friend?
You know that there is uh... there is a... a saying which goes "a hungry man is an angry man."
Okay!
Maybe Buhari doesn't want to pay their salaries now.
If they stand in the road, their eyes are red and you just provoke them,  they will take what they want to, slap you, break your car.
Aha, that's it.
People won't just stand on the road and be doing all those things without anything to feed on and everything now!
It's no good now!
Okay it's... it's... it's... it's now you are beginning to... to improve and say what I want to hear.
Aha!
No, no, no!
Even...
It's not what you were saying before.
What you're saying now, that's better.
It's going... it's... it's going in the direction of what I'm saying.
Even uh... uh... uh... uh... uh... teachers, they won't pay them.
If anybody wants to respect any profession anywhere at all, it's teachers they are supposed to... as in just give, as in uh... Gbosa, as in more than a hundred Gbosa.
Hm.
They're the ones they're supposed to rate more.
Okay.
They're supposed to respect them more now.
Okay, me I become a doctor, you, you become a lawyer, this person becomes an engineer, who is the person who trained us?
Okay!
Hm!
Is it not a teacher?
They're the ones they're supposed to pay more now, but you'll go to schools, teachers will be earning uh... even less than the money they give uh... youth corpers.
Why now?
Come on!
It's no good, it's no good.
Eh, babe!
They are supposed to res-... respect these teachers.
Babe, let me...
If they can't respect teachers, you should give them a better salary, give them a better house.
Will they give it to police or any other workers?
Hm!
I don't know why Nigerians don't just want to change!
You know that Nigeria...
And they'll be saying "change begins with you and me."
Where?
They say charity begins at home.
What kind of charity?
X forget all those things!
Me, I've started my charity!
My charity has begun at home since I was born.
I'm doing my charity work, I'm doing it.
If it means giving peo-... people uh... this thing... if it means respecting people, I'm doing my charity work.
But, let Buhari do his own charity and he'll change for us.
Let the Governor and all of them do our charity work in our life now, please!
Leave that thing!
That... that... that... that change that they are talking about is not for everybody.
The change they're talking about now is that everything is increasing.
That change...
Hm.
The thing is that salaries are going down and what we're buying is increasing.
Okay.
Increasing!
Nothing is difficult for her.
I dunno.
Haha!
I'm just tired.
You know that I've been laughing when people talk about this change, change, change in things.
I was telling my mom that...
My father kept saying "ah! This change is for real, Jonathan..."
That was one of the first changes that happened.
They want Jonathan to step down, they are tired of Jonathan, Jonathan is a corrupt man.
I told them no!
They did not ask.
When they were talking about the change, they did not ask "what kind of change?"
You know, change has a positive side.
There is good change, and there is useless change.
Not all change is good.
That was how they said they wanted change.
I said okay!
I was just looking at them.
I said, you should all go.
Today, here they are!
They're the ones complaining.
My old... my old... my mom, she just cries everyday.
I laughed at her.
My brother, please let us just relax!
I said they should go and sit down!
That is a Nigerian issue, please!
It's God... it's God... it's God... it's God who will take control.
Uh, Nigerian matters.
That's... that's what we've been talking about.
God will take control.
It won't get finished, will it?
Well, brother, as a Warri boy, the thing is that this country (the way I see it), this country does not hav-... it doesn't have a good future just, just because of the way things are, anyways.
Because normally, they do... they do promise us this will happen, that it will happen, but all of us have been waiting, nothing is happening.
Take my family for example: I remember last time when they said that they wanted to pay uh... old pensioners something.
Almost...
This was almost four or five years ago.
We've been waiting.
Nothing is happening.
And most of the things about the coun-... the economy, they say things will get better, things will get better, but the thing is... everything is just going from bad to worse, like a grease fire.
But anyhow, any which way we... all of us... the thing is, Nigerians, we are hardworkers.
For instance, recently, in my area, they just did some demolition, and some people were impacted.
They didn't even warn anybody saying "we are coming, move your things."
They just came and pulled everything down, different houses, including people's shops, their cars.
The man who was driving the bulldozer just buried everything.
Some people even died just yesterday.
So the thing is, we Nigerians who own this country, they are treating us like we're foreigners in our own land where my mother gave birth to me, and my... my... it's here that my father comes from.
It's like I'm a foreigner.
It's like I... I smuggled myself into the country, but actually, it's my country, it's me, it's my...
I'm a citizen.
The government should seriously stop all these promises of theirs, they should try to work out something for us uh... the origi-... or, or, uh... ordinary Nigerians so that we can get our hands on basic things.
Because if a guy does a bad thing, they will say he's a thief, but if a guy hustles, they will bring us back to square one.
So, at least, the government should try to do something somehow.
But for me anyway, what I... I would not like the government to do... the government should try a little... they should create a few opportunities for people.
At least, even if it is...
Because the time when...
I heard the time Buhari said he wanted to get into government, he said he will be giving every graduate five... five thousand, or some amount of money that they would use to start a business.
So, that kind of thing would make sense to help the country move forward a little.
Because as they say, an idle man is the devil's workshop.
A person who stays in one place, he will be thinking of how to steal, or how to kidnap a person, and that's what we don't want.
So the government should try to take, put some money into the economy so people can put food on the table.
Because sometimes, even some families, die of hunger.
And they say they want the country to be fine, to be better, but the government is not doing anything.
Instead, all you hear is this one stole this, that one...
This one says he wants to return this one, that one did that.
But we are the ones who... we are the ones who suffer more, the ones at the bottom.
So the government should make an effort.
That's why we voted them in.
They are supposed to protect us.
They should try to cover us.
They should arrange little... some little things for us.
Even if it's just giving us a little money, to start a business, or do something.
It will make more sense than having people do things by themselves.
In the end, they will still come and take it from the ground.
Well, the problem I faced when I was little was when uh... my mother was fired the time I was in school.
Because my mother worked hard, made a little money, sent me abroad to go learn a little something.
So, that was how...
My mother then told me that they had dropped them from the worklist.
That they were looking for younger people, they were in need of new people.
So, then they sacked the old ones without giving them anything.
They just dropped them like that.
That there was no more money in it.
That was even before Goodluck got into power.
Right up to now, we are still waiting.
They are saying they will be calling.
Every, every time they call, they say they want to collect names.
So-, even some of her colleagues, some have even died.
Others don't even know...
We don't even know where some of the others are.
So, the thing is, many of us Nigerians have suffered to bring this country to where it is.
The thing is that none of us is, is, is ev..., none of us is...
The government is just looking.
Uh... now in some countries like London for instance, they pay senior citizens.
People who have been in the country a long time, they give them a small allowance because they know they can't work like before.
So if the government can, even if it is not an allowance, they should pay people what they owe them.
Like their fees, and money they are supposed to give them.
Pensions, that will do.
It will go a long way because most people, that is what they depend on.
So, that's what I'm just begging the government to try to do.
The government should try to come up with a little something because we, we are suffering a lot.
We are the ones who suffer more.
If anything gets more expensive (fuel, or whatever else), it's the poor who suffer, because the rich have more money.
Because in Nigeria, it's like the poor are becoming poorer, and the rich, they are getting richer.
Because it's like everything is getting worse.
So, the government should make an effort.
Because I am not the only one, many of my mates too.
Yesterday, for instance, one of my friends who stays in the same area as me, a bulldozer came to get rid of the shop where his mother sells food.
And that's how they get by.
It just scattered the food, including the cooler and the fridge too.
And after, they will say "we are one Nigeria."
So, that kind of thing makes no sense anymore.
Even if they want to move a person from where he is, they will first warn him to leave.
Not that they will just come and do anything because they have power.
Because now in Nigeria, it's like the poor don't have any rights.
And it doesn't make sense because all of us are one Nigeria.
So, they should have made a little effort just to settle people.
But don't make... don't make poor people... don't make people turn to crime now, and start to do what makes no sense.
So, that is just what I am begging of the government: let them be useful.
They should not just sit there talking about the twenty thirteen budget when it's twenty seventeen.
They should move forward little by little.
They should not take it too far.
Please, because we are the ones who suffer the most.
This story I wanna tell now is about my own life experience.
My mother and father are...
They are from Etsako in Edo State, in Nigeria, where they had me.
They gave birth to me, but they didn't just have me.
There are eight of us.
We were six boys, and two girls.
In the process, as you get older, life, it is full of different challenges.
Though it's God who helps us all through.
When we were growing up, as young children, when our parents gave... when they gave birth to us, we were strong, and healthy, and we were growing up well.
We played outside, played when coming back to the house, went to school, came back home.
One fateful day, then when I turned seven, I was going to school, we had started writing our final exam to go to the next class.
I was in primary two then, ready to go to primary three.
I didn't finish my exam.
It was from there, I got sick and had to come back to the house.
Then they rushed me back to the house.
Ah!
When my mother saw me, she said no, this one is not the one (Though my father had travelled, he was not around...)... she said this is not a case of self medication.
Then she swung into action.
With her nextdoor neighbour, they took me to a specialist hospital.
When we got there, they said "no, uh... this one needs to be admitted straight away."
Then they placed me on admission.
Then they did a series of surgical operations, even before my father came back from his journey.
As he came back from his journey, he said his body gave him signs, so he came back.
Then he knew that uh... I was hospitalized.
Then we really tried everything, it was a battle for almost a year in that specialist...
Then when they wanted to do renovation, they transferred me to UBTH.
They said no, I should go to UBTH.
So I was in UBTH.
UBTH also placed me on admission, they did a series of surgical operations on my body.
Then...
Well, they did a good job.
They brought me back to life.
At the end of the day, even on my sick bed, I was not even praying to live because the pain I was enduring at that time was too much, I was in an awful situation.
So we tried, tried, tried everything.
Even the hospital could not make headway.
Then they said, okay, let's try native medicine.
Then my parents took me to the villages, all sorts of villages.
One guy would bring his own medicine.
Another would would say, "ah, it's this.
Someone who had this disease took this one... it's this one... it cured him at the time."
They did all sorts of things.
Some would say no.
You should do a sacrifice.
Do all the sacrifice for...
All these ones I am telling you now, it took us seven years.
So even my parents got tired.
Even my father got tired.
He then realised the truth.
He said, this one is... it's either I live, or I go to the other side.
Then he said he could not continue anymore.
Then he moved me from the village to town, and said that whatever happens, we will accept it.
Glory be to God!
October... (but I cannot remember the exact year now) October... (just after seven years)... a... October second, it was that day [eng that I found my healing eng].
And this time, I went back to the church.
I will say that for this one, my life is a miracle.
You know, I didn't get healed at the herbalist's.
I did not get healed at the hospital where I went.
It was in the church, when we came back to the church, where we were born, which... which is the Roman Catholic Church, it was there I found my miracle, I found my healing.
This dish, the dish I want to teach you all how to cook, is egusi.
The way to cook egusi is to take out your egusi seeds, and grind them.
Mstchew.
If you finish grinding, you can use...
Some use a grinding stone to grind it, some use me- uh... a grinding machine to grind it, some use a blender to grind it.
However you do it, the esugi is smooth.
When it is smooth... it has turned to powder, you put it into a bowl, you put it into a plastic bowl.
You put it into a plastic bowl.
Once you've put it in the plastic bowl, you add a little water, you stir it.
You can add chilli peppers.
Once you've added your peppers, slice your onions and put them inside.
Some like to fry it while others don't.
Some like to fry it, others don't.
But I want to tell you the one that th-... you...
Uh... it is the fried one I want to tell you about now.
For the fried version, as you put it into the bowl, you turn it and that's it.
You put the uh... onions inside the ma-... uh... inside the egusi.
You turn, eh you..., you put the..., uh... sliced onions into it.
You stir it well.
Once you have finished stirring it, you put it into the hot oil.
But you don't wait for the oil to bleach before you put everything inside.
When you have finished putting it inside, inside the ho-, uh... hot oil, you then keep stirring it so that it will not burn.
You keep stirring it until uh... the egusi has changed colour.
Once it has changed colour inside that pot, it has changed colour a little, you see the cu-... the co-... uh... difference in colour, then, you add water.
If it's meat stock, if it's meat stock, you add... you pour it inside.
Once you've poured the meat stock inside the, the... inside the dish, you stir it a little.
Leave it to boil.
But before it boils, you have put all your maggi, your salt, your crayfish.
If it's locust bean cake you have, you stir it into the dish.
Once you have finished putting it in, and it has finished boiling, then you add your meat.
If the meat is not soft yet, you add it when you put all your ingredients so that everything boils together.
Once everything has boiled together, everything has finished boiling, then you add...
If it's bitter leaf that you have, that you want to put inside, you add it; if it's pumpkin leaf that you want to put inside, add it.
Then, add salt.
Then leave it to boil.
If it has boiled very well, it has boiled very very well, as you see that it has boiled very very well, taste it.
If the taste st-... if the taste ni-... it doesn't taste how you want, add more again.
If it's the salt that is not sufficient yet, add a little more salt.
Then when it has finished boiling, bring it down.
If it's garri you wanna have with it, uh... that you want to eat it with, use garri.
If uh... It's eba, use eba.
If it's mashed yam that you want to use, use mashed yam.
If it's semo, use semo, or amala.
Any one, any food you want to eat it with, it's... you can use it to eat it.
The dish that I like to cook, is, it's banga.
Because banga is natural oil.
That's what banga is.
To cook a dish of banga, you need to extract the oil and keep it.
If you want to use the oil, you can use it.
And banga is a dish that's good for the body.
Even our doctors nowadays, they are encouraging us to cook it.
So, I will teach you how to cook banga.
One you have b-, bought your banga at the market, make sure that you wash it very well.
Or maybe it's from your backyard you pick it.
Make sure that you wash it very well.
Put it into a pot.
It's done...
If the banga is done, you will smell the aroma that tells you it's done.
Once it is done, after twenty or twenty five minutes, you remove it.
You pound it in a mortar.
When you pound it in a mortar, make sure that all the husk, the edges, eh the back shell which you have pounded, is all smooth.
Because if it's not smooth, the oil doesn't come out very well.
Once it's done, after twenty or twenty five minutes, you remove it.
So once you've pounded it very well in a mortar, then you filter it with hot water.
Some, they say they don’t want it to be too watery.
But by the time you have used enough water to filter it well, that is when the thing comes out well.
Ehen!
But banga really takes uh... time to cook!
Now if you're using firewood, you see that yes, it is quick.
The dish gets thick fast.
But if it's a gas cooker, if it's a stove, be ready to use enough gas, and enough kerosene.
But that doesn’t mean anything.
To get the typical result, it... that's what matters.
Because if you don’t use hot water to rinse it well, the banga will still stick to the kernel, and that is, is a waste.
So you need to use hot water to wash it well.
You should take your time.
So if it's meat you want to cook it with, if it's fresh fish, if it's... if it's ponmo, it is good because even before the ponmo is cooked the preparation will have thickened.
But if it's meat, it's still good.
If it's fresh fish, make sure that the ban-... the soup has thickened up a little before you add your fresh fish.
We know that our fresh fish is... it's not tough.
In less than five or ten minutes, it is done.
So any of those uh... uh... meats we want to use, we use them.
Use them to... use them to cook the dish so it's thick.
Then if it's starch you want to eat it with, if it's semo... but banga, starch is what goes well with it, so it tastes good.
Some say they don’t like starch.
The way they stir it like it's... it's liquid.
But me, I want to tell you that if you stir that starch, if you add salt, if you put it on the plate, it will be very very easy to serve.
Now those who say they don't eat salt, (it doesn’t mean that you don’t eat salt, but at least, if it's only a pinch of salt, you put some inside) turn the starch with it so that you can eat.
To train a child in fashion design, first we interview them to see how much they know.
Why do we interview them?
So that us seamstresses, we'll know where to start with the person.
Because if they're schooled, a small job is what we'll do with them.
But if they're not schooled, we'll start from scratch.
For someone schooled, pedalling the machine won't be hard.
Because that's the first process.
We will teach them to pedal.
And this pedalling now, it goes in two directions.
We pedal forward, we pedal backward.
Backwards isn't easy at all.
It breaks needles.
But if you're pedalling forward, you will know that yes, you're on the line.
And with someone who's educated you know, you will know that yes, it's forward they're pedalling.
But someone who did not go to school, they'll just be pedalling for pedalling's sake.
But if you look at it, you'll know they're pedalling backwards.
And the way they're pedalling backwards, it won't sew.
But if they're pedalling forward, it's fine.
For someone who is schooled, pedalling won't be hard for them.
But if they didn't go to school, us seamstresses, we'll need to take time to sit down on the machine.
As we are pedalling, they'll be watching our legs.
They'll know we're pedalling forward.
But for someone schooled, we don't need to do all this for them.
We'll just give 'em a machine and say 'here you go, pedal!'
And if you give them a machine, we will need to remove the needle.
Why we remove the needle that's there is so it won't crack, because if we don’t remove the needle, if it cracks and we put in thread and are sewing, our sewing... our stitchings will not be fine at all.
This is why we take out the needle.
But for someone who happens to have gone to school, if they're pedalling forward, we just do a bit of work on them.
We'll just take that pedalling work...
Just, if they're someone really, really smart, we, uh... teaching them the pedalling work... takes maybe a week.
But someone who is not schooled, uh... after a month we'll still be teaching them to pedal.
Like with a kid who's just starting to grow, you'll be teaching him how to eat uh... solid food.
Not milk, not custard anymore.
So let's see...
That's what makes us ask for someone's level of education before we know how to get into the details with them on our fashion design work.
But if they know how to pedal, that means that we will give them cement paper, or brown paper, we will thread the needle so they can sew with a needle.
If they're sewing in a straight line, you know that if you give them cloth as a sample, they will be able to sew straight.
But if they don't sew straight, you'll know that if you give them cloth, or pieces, that they should sew on it, they won't be able to sew very well.
So, that's the thing.
Ladies, good afternoon!
I hope you have a safe delivery.
I want to talk to you about immunization.
Don't get angry.
I will take some of your time.
I want to tell you about immunization because there are women here.
It's in the village, that's where they are.
They will go to the farm.
They don’t know what they call immunization.
But it's good we let you know what immunization is.
Immunization is when you give birth to a child, you take it to the hospital, to be given an injection.
If we look at our world nowadays, if you have a baby and you fail to get it vaccinated (for instance, BCG is the first one you will take), if you fail to get it a BCG shot, another person will not be able to carry it, apart from you alone.
But if you get it BCG, everyone else will be able to carry it.
That's the first one you'll give it right after birth.
Then, there's another one that will be given again a month later.
After a month, they will give it in its hand.
That one, it will be given to it in its hand.
If any sicknesses come, the child will be able to resist them.
Because all this immunization we're talking about, if we don’t get it for our children, that’s what makes some people give birth and say that after a while the child died.
They don’t know what killed the child.
All these ones, that is what is...
All this is what makes us say it's good to get our children vaccinated.
If we look at this immunization, children get vaccinated before they are nine months... one year.
Even uh... this uh... polio which is getting around which makes a child... you will give birth to a child and it won't walk on time!
You will give birth to a child, and he'll look like an imbecile.
It's the advantage of...
When you immunize... immunize our children, all these diseases won't get close to your child.
That's what I want to tell you all.
Thank you.
Good afternoon, my countrymen!
This is the one o'clock news coming to you from Bronze FM, one O one point five in Benin City.
And this is Allen Ujewa, bringing you the news.
Edo State Government has told bus drivers to park first at Oba Akenzua Cultural Centre so that the passengers won't suffer.
At the time the Chief of Staff, Oga Taiwo Akerele, was speaking to journalists in Robota Hall, saying that the government knows people are walking long distances to board busses.
But he then said that they have been doing everything to create permanent bus stops.
The Curator in the National Museum in Edo State, Mr Theophillus Omogbai, told the Federal and State Governments to rearrange the museums in the country to make sure that they can meet world standards to help boost tourism in the country.
Mr Omogbai said this while he was talking to Radio Nigeria during this year's International Museum Day, which was held on the eighteenth of May.
Mr Omogbai said that Nigerian people don't visit museums.
That's what is causing the poor economic situation of the tourism sector in Nigeria, unlike other countries.
The National President of the Nigerian Union of Women Journalists (NAWOJ), Comrade Ifeyinwa Omowole, called on women to be at the forefront in the socioeconomic development of the country.
Comrade Omowole said this during the programme called Newsmaker on Bronze FM in Benin.
On this matter, she said that no nation will develop without women getting involved in the country.
A seventy four year old man, Mr Habibu Ogiator, who was kidnapped when he was going to his farm in Etsako East Local Government Area, has been released.
According to Mr Ogiator, he said (at the time he was telling this story), he then said that he had been in the custody of these people who kidnapped him for two days before they released him at last.
He then hailed the people of Ujendu Community for the way they handled the matter, which made them release him.
And he then used the opportunity to beg the police and other security personnel to improve the security in the area.
My countrymen, this is where the one o'clock news will end, coming to you from Bronze FM, one O one point five in Benin City.
My name is Allen Ujewa.
Good afternoon.
There was this woman, she had three boys.
So, she cooked porridge.
Then she asked them if they'd eat it.
They said no.
Then she left and went to the market.
As she came back, the last born had already gone and eaten everything.
Then he put plenty of sand and water.
The woman came back and asked them, "who ate the food?"
Then they said it wasn't them, it wasn't them.
Then he told her that it was the last born, he was the one who went to the kitchen and he forgot his cap.
Then she said, "let's go swim in the river."
When they got there, the first one sang, "if I'm the one who ate this food, if I'm the one who ate this food, Kpangolo must swallow me, the fish must swallow me."
Ehen.
Then he crossed, nothing swallowed him.
The second one.
"If I'm the one who ate this food, if I'm the one who ate this food, Kpangolo must swallow me, the fish must swallow me."
Ehn, nothing.
Then it was the last one's turn.
He sang, "if I'm the one, who ate this..."
"Speak up!"
"If I'm the one who ate this food, if I'm..."
"Speak up, let them hear you!"
"If I'm the one who ate this soup, Kpangolo must swallow me, the fish..."
He didn’t even finish singing.
A fish just swallowed him like that.
This woman, she had three children.
So, she cooked porridge.
Then she asked them if they'd eat it.
They said no.
So she said "I want to go to the market" and then she went to the market.
Before she came back, the last born had already gone into the kitchen and eaten the food.
So the mother asked, "who ate this food?"
Then they said it wasn't them, it wasn't them.
Then, their mother said, "let's go swim in the river."
Then they went to the river, and they swam.
Then the first child sang "if I'm the one who ate this food, if I'm the one who ate this food, Kpangolo must swallow me, the fish must swallow me."
Ehen!
Ehen, he crossed the river.
Nothing swallowed him.
The second child.
"If I'm the one who ate this food, if I'm the one who ate this food, Kpangolo must swallow me, the fish must swallow me."
He crossed like that.
Nothing.
Then, it was the last one's turn.
"If I'm the one who ate this food, if I'm the one who ate this food, Kpangolo..."
"Speak up, we can't hear you."
"If I'm the one who ate this food, if..."
"Speak up!"
"If I'm the one who ate this food, if I'm the one who ate this food, Kpangolo must swallow me, the fish must swallow me."
He didn't even finish singing.
A fish just came out like that and swallowed him.
The clever girl, who was smarter than the king.
There was this, uh...
The, this girl was in this village.
The father was proud of her for being clever, she is well read, she is clever.
The father was proud of her.
So, the king told him...
Uh, so the king heard about it.
So he was, so he was hearing that the man...
The man was was saying that the child was proud, the child was very wise.
The child was clever.
So the king asked the man to come one day.
He told him, "I hear you're saying that your child is clever. Ge-, get, she's got more sense than than anyone."
The man said, "yes."
He said she is very clever.
So the King said, "okay, since you said your daughter is clever, take these eggs."
"The eggs, if no one breaks them with their hands, will they hatch by themselves?"
"Will a chicken hatch?"
They said, "yes."
Then he said, "now, take them home to your child."
"Tell your child that she should hatch these eggs. Let the chicks come out."
He said that if she cannot do it, if the child cannot do it, then, they will kill, they will beat the man to death.
So the man said, "uhuh!"
So the man left.
As he got home, he told the child, "listen to what the King said."
He said, "if you can't do it, they will beat me to death."
Then the girl told him, "papa, don't worry. Go into the house. Go to sleep."
As...
"Go into the house. Go to sleep."
"Don't worry."
"Tomorrow, you... I will give you the answer."
Papa then said, "uhuh!"
So the father went to sleep.
Mor-... the next day, the girl told her father that he should carry this bag of beans, boiled beans, that they'd cooked.
He should take it and hide it at someone's place.
Let him shout.
Let me dig this br-... let me... let me plant these beans.
Let them produce more.
These boiled beans, let me plant them.
Let them produce more.
Then the King went to see him.
The girl said "okay."
So, as the man carried the beans out, he then went to meet-..., as he got to where the King goes to rest, when he saw the king coming, he said "If I plant these boiled beans, they'll produce even more."
"If I plant these boiled beans, they'll give me even more."
So the king saw him.
So he said to him, "how do you...?"
"Are you out of your mind?"
"How can you say let... how can you think that these cooked beans will produce some more?"
He said... so he said, "since the eggs which have already been boiled will hatch chicks, the beans that have already been cooked will be able to, uh... will be able to produce more."
Then the King looked at the man's face closely.
Then he said, "this is the man who was given that egg."
So he said "indeed, the child is clever."
Then he said "okay."
Then he took the...
Then he said...
Okay. Then he took the man to the pala-... uh... palace.
The man, he then told the man that he should take uh... this thing... pots, a lot of pots.
He said he should take them to his house.
He said not to have her fetch water with them.
But have f-... the man fetch water with the pots and bring it to him.
But the girl should not go to the river and carry them.
He said if he cannot do it, they will beat him.
He will die.
The man got home.
So he told the child "this what the King said."
So the child told him, "go inside. Go to sleep. Get some rest."
"Don't worry."
"Tomorrow, I will give you the answer."
He then said "okay."
The next day, as the gm-, the man wanted to go to the palace, the child told him, "this pot that the king gave you, tell him it's leaking."
"The pot has a hole in the bottom."
"Tell him that it's leaking."
"Take it and bring it back to the..."
"Go and tell the King."
So he went to tell the King.
So the King said, "ah! This daughter of yours is very wise."
Then he said, "your daughter's the one I'll marry."
He then said "is that so?"
Then he said, okay, let him go to the house to tell the child what the King said.
As he got home, he went and told the child, "listen to what the King said. "
He said, "it's you he's going to marry."
The girl didn't want to be... marry him.
She then said, "ah! Let me marry him." Then she'll be the queen of the land.
Then he said, "okay."
As the girl got to the palace, she told the king that if she, maybe if she does something the king does not like in the palace, if the king sends her away, she will take what is special to her in the palace.
The king then said okay, he understood.
So then he married the girl.
Then they got married.
Then he married the girl.
So the king started buying her all these fine clothes, jewelry.
The girl started wearing them.
Every day, she would take almost an hour to put on her makeup and get dressed.
So the King got angry.
One day, when they wanted to travel, the girl started putting on her clothes and makeup.
So the King got angry.
Then he told her, "you don't even have time for your husband."
"All you really have time for is jewelry and all the things I'm buying you."
So the girl told him he shouldn't be angry.
Then he said he would stay married to the girl, and she should pack her things.
The girl should go now.
She said she's not going anywhere.
He said she should go to her father's house.
Then the girl said okay.
That... she told the man that anything that she is... that is close to her... anything that is precious to her, is... I will take with me.
The man said, 'uhuh! Let her take it. Let her get going."
The girl then said okay, please let her spend just this one night in his house. She said the next day, she will go.
The King then said okay.
So the next day, in the night, the girl put some sleeping pills in the King's drink.
The King drank it.
Then he went to sleep.
While he was sleeping, she told his body guards that they should carry him to her father's house. She said he should carry him to her father's house.
So the body guards carried him to her father's house.
Then the girl went to meet him.
The next morning, as the man woke up, he found himself somewhere else.
Then he asked, "ah! Where are my... where is my palace? Where are my guards? Everybody?"
Then the girl said, "didn't you say I should go to my hub-... my husband, my father's house?"
"So I went to my father's house."
"I told you that anything that is precious to me, I will take with me."
So, then she said, "so it's you who is precious to me. You're the one who made me bring you here."
So the king said, "wow!"
He said, "you indeed, you are a very... a cl-... you are cle-... you are a clever girl."
He then said, "thank you."
My name is Ibrahim Salomi.
What I want to tell you about is how egusi is prepared.
First of all,you will grind your egusi depending on how much you want to make.
After you've ground the egusi, you will pound pepper and keep it on the side.
You will get everyt-... all your ingredients ready so that the dish will be easy to prepare.
After you've ground your pepper, uh... you slice your vegetables.
Maybe, if you want to use ugwu, it's either ugwu, or bitter leaf, but mostly, as for me, I like to use uh... pumpkin leaf (that is ugwu) to prepare my egusi.
Then after I've sliced the ugwu, then, I wash my meat, my okporoko (that is dry f-... uh... stockfish), and then my dryfish.
I wash everything together.
Then I... I steam it with the meat
Then I add some seasoning like Maggi cubes, salt, and onion.
After it's steamed thoroughly, I take it down.
Then, I put the oil in my pot.
As I put the oil into my pot, I like to fry my egusi.
It has this kind of taste it gives me.
Then I put the egusi in the oil and fry it well to my taste.
After I've... after I've fried the egusi, then I'll put in the meat and the fish, and stockfish I have already seasoned.
Then I'll put it into the egusi.
I'll leave it on the fire to boil for about ten minutes.
After it has boiled properly, I'll put in the pumpkin leaves I've washed thoroughly.
Then I'll put the pumpkin leaves into it.
I'll leave it in the pot... on the fire, for it to steam like... it should cook for about ten more minutes.
Then my egusi dish is ready.
After I've taken it down, then I'll decide whether I want to eat it with akpu, pounded yam, or garri.
Then, you can enjoy it with your akpu, garri,or pounded yam, whatever you want, but me personally, I am in my place, my hometown, Kogi State.
So, as I was coming back now, I got off the bus.
Then this one criminal picked my pocket and took my purse.
He thought there was money in it.
Meanwhile, I had my school ID card, and just my ATM card, in the purse.
So when I realized, I turned back and said quickly "hey, give me my purse!"
Immediately, he was... afraid, so he gave me the purse back.
So, that was how he and I walked away.
He can't steal from me because I've been around the block.
That is how the story ends.
Uh, the day...
I want to talk about uh, the... how I spent my Christmas last year.
Well, it was nice.
Me, I don’t kno-... I don’t know how to go out at Christmas.
Every Christmas, I like staying at home.
It was my sister who started it.
Even she, she didn't know how to go out at Christmas.
What would she do?
On the twenty fifth, we would cook.
After cooking, we would eat.
After eating, we would stay at home, watch movies, drink, do whatever.
But this last Christmas, my cousin said no.
She said I needed to relax and go out.
I told her okay.
She said I should go and get ready.
I finished getting ready.
I was just putting on makeup.
The first time I ever wore makeup was that last Christmas.
So she told me I should sit down.
Then she applied my makeup, ha!
I was no longer myself.
I didn’t even...
Even the picture I snapped myself, the picture, I don’t...
Uh... If I look at the picture, always think that I can't be that good looking girl.
So, we got going.
I asked her, "where are we going?"
She told me I should get on the bus first, and we'd go.
I told her okay.
Then we got to the bus.
She snapped pictures.
Then she told me...
She posted them on Instagram.
Then she said, "my cousin who never goes out, thank God I took her out today."
Hah!
Then I asked, "what will I do?"
She said I wasn't going to do anything.
So I relaxed.
So, we went.
We went to Ogui Road.
I didn’t know it was New Berries which is... or there was a place like that.
That was the first time I went to New Berries.
So we reached Ogui, then stopped and walked to New Berries.
When we got there, there was a lot of people because it was Christmas.
So there were so many people.
They were looking for...
They were selling tickets.
So we went to buy tickets, bought tickets before going.
But, well, it was fine.
Because I wasn’t going alone.
I was with one of my sisters, and uh, that cousin of mine.
We ate and ate and ate.
So we met people, they bought us food, and then bought us drinks.
We exchanged numbers, did everything.
We ju-, we just went home around... around... like after eight, before nine.
That's when we left New Berries.
Then they said they wanted to do a video chat on the road.
They took my phone and were snapping pictures, shouting in the street, "merry Christmas, merry Christmas."
Then I told them, "stop that!"
You're embarassing me while I'm following you.
So we hopped on a bus.
We waited for the bus mstchew, for about thirty minutes before we saw one, then we started heading home.
They got to another bus stop, then they started doing this thing.
Then I told them "please, I'm really sleepy, let them... let's go now."
Then we left first, got home.
That was how we took...
Uh, uh... well, that was how I celebrated Christmas.
It was very nice.
Man, eh!
Things are happening!
Look how my sister and I just woke up yesterday morning.
Normally, if we keep you waiting... if we wake up now, it's to pray and head to work.
So as we woke up, we started hearing this noise outside.
Noise everywhere.
I started wondering and said, "sis, we haven't prayed! Come back here, and let's sit down and pray to God first."
Then she came back.
Then she knelt down.
We prayed to our God.
As we finished praying, we opened the door to go outside.
There were these two girls staying in the compound, mstchew!
Oh boy am I tired of this public yard in Enugu.
We met Amaka and Ogo, who are staying in our compound.
It was a fight.
Early that morning, I said to myself, "hah, girls, girls these days!"
Instead of thinking about something better this morning, it was about the fighting this early morning.
Do you mean to tell me that if you were at your mother's house, that's... that's how you'd be fighting every morning?
So, we asked them.
As it happens, it'd been taking place since last year, which is when the... Amaka moved into the compound.
That's how they woke up yesterday morning, and started fighting.
Fighting everywhere.
Then I was uh...
Ah, I didn't even know where to start!
As I stood there, I looked and looked and had nothing to... I mean nothing to even say to them.
I just stood there.
I was tired and said, "sis, I will talk to this pers-, to these girls when I come back from the house."
"Let's go inside and get ready for work."
So that's how we walked away, leaving them there.
They went on talking and shouting everywhere.
You could hear them shouting everywhere in the compound!
People were... were even watching from another compound.
I said, "look at this disgrace! Ah those girls!"
I don't expect this kind of thing from young girls these days.
So that's how my sister and I just walked into the bathroom, got ready and went to work.
So as I came back in the evening now, I have nothing to do because I know, even in my own house, even when I used to stay with my parents, if anything happened, I don't talk when others are talking.
It's when I come back, when it's convienient for me, that I'll call them, talk to them.
So in the evening, as soon as I came back from ho-... from work now, I went into Amaka's room and told her, "in the next thirty minutes, I want to see you in my room."
Then I told Ogo the same thing.
So in the next thirty minutes, the two of them came into my room.
So I sat them down.
As a girl, as a fellow girl which is what I am to them, I sat them down to talk, talk to them, talk some sense into them, and told them, "girls, look, imagine, at this age of ours now, we're not supposed to be doing this kind of thing because it's disgrace for us."
We, we are not supposed to do this type of thing at all.
At this age, we're supposed to be talking, be thinking of how to handle our own family in the future.
So, but I don't expect this kind of thing from them.
But after all, well, they made a little effort.
The two of them tried to understand.
They understood a little.
So, we started talking about something sensible.
We even started planning our future, talking about good things which will help us in the future.
Not talking about...
I mean, waking up early in the morning and talking crap.
So I told them what I know, I mean so many things ab-... about the advantages of what they are doing.
But at the end of the day, they tried to understand me.
So, well, that's how we managed to end that one.
I'm still praying it won't happen again.
So, that's how it is.
That do-... lecturer Agude, that man gives us so much stress.
What did he do again?
All...
I heard that from year one to year three, nobody passes his exam.
What kind of a man is that?
Haha.
Is it babe?
That man, that's how his life is.
Wait, have you only heard of it?
Do you still hear about it?
Do you still hear about it?
Did you see it clearly with your eyes?
Is it babe?
Is it babe?
It landed right on my face.
Me, I don't uh...
They failed it.
Fai-...
They don't look back.
I'm not scared, I'm not afraid.
I know that God is right behind me.
I can pass it.
Whatever it takes, I will pass.
I'm praying for God to stand by me.
Or me I... me I... me I will never fail.
I don't want repeat...
You see, repeating (a class), I don't want it to leave traces in my...
It's no small thing.
How can you bring the results home to give to your parents?
Mstchew!
What will I tell my old man?
Well, that's how it is.
Nah, it's fucked up now, you understand?
It's no small thing.
I wanna eat.
You wanna eat?
As I'm sitting here, my stomach is calling me.
My friend, it's no small thing.
The canteen is beyond me.
Ah no problem.
What are we going to eat?
Or is there abacha there?
Abacha?
You'll use Pepsi to dilute it.
Why do you like abacha?
Man, that's what I want to eat.
What will I do?
Why do you like abacha?
It's chea-... it's cheap.
It's what I can afford, it's what I want to eat.
Man, please, eat better food!
Eat akpu instead!
What are you saying?
Eat good food!
What are you saying?
What are you saying?
Stop talking like that.
Please, no.
You're fucking up, you're disappointing me.
If you put it over, now add fish, Oduazu, ah, you'll really like it.
Babe, you're disappointing me!
It's no small thing.
I swear to God!
Babe, you're discouraging me!
Ah!
Hm.
Have you heard from Malu?
I mean, Peace said that Malu is coming today.
That woman too eh!
And she gives us expensive things to buy.
What kind?
Every time she will be giving us textbooks to buy for one [thousand] five [hundred].
Doesn't she know we're students?
Aha!
But the thing is not too expensive.
If you go to Ise, it's three thousand!
They don't hesitate.
They don't hesitate.
Babe, I can only afford what I can.
I don't have that much, I don't have it.
But the way...
You know wh-... you know wh-...?
It's not the money that annoys me.
Do you know what annoys me?
He doesn't teach well now.
Wait first!
She gives us a book, uhuh, and says we should summarize the whole thing by tomorrow.
Are we ghosts?
Will we turn to witchcraft?
It is not sm... haha, it's not a small... it isn't a bit of witchcraft.
Ah!
Nah, babe!
I don't know.
Let her just adjust herself.
Man, when Peace told me that thing, it was like if I put my own plaster on the wall, it would have fallen.
I don't understand.
Haha.
Haha.
It's no small thing
Where is Peace even, that, that class rep?
It's like that girl is playing funny.
It seems like she's gone with... she's run away with her crush.
Haha.
She's going with her crush, haha!
So she's following her crush?
No problem.
Ha!
Oh God!
Mama, good evening, ma.
Good evening my daughter.
Mama, I like this egg of yours.
How much are you selling it for?
Fifty naira.
Fifty naira?
Uhuh!
Ah!
That's expensive.
Let me give you thirty naira now.
My daughter, my daughter, it is the egg that's expensive... it is the egg that's expensive now?
So the egg is expensive?
Ahah, please.
Let me buy it for thirty naira.
I try, I try, I try.
You try, you try.
Please, go a bit lower.
Reduce more?
That's why I should...
I'm selling it for fifty naira.
Eheh!
I have reduced the price.
It's a shame.
I can only take fifty naira off.
Okay, let me buy it now.
Make an effort!
Buy it!
This one, what is this?
This is... this is Indomie, my daughter.
Indomie!
How do they cook it?
I don't know how they cook it.
That's how they cook it.
When they open it, they'll put it in a pot, and put in onions.
You see what it is.
Uhuh?
Ehn?
So everything's inside this thing?
Uhuh, everything!
Hey, this thing is fine!
It's fine, my daughter.
Ehey!
It's not food for children?
Is it food for children?
Hm!
Hey, let me buy it for my children!
Buy it!
It's good for them?
It's good!
Everyone buys it from here.
Hey!
What will I put in it again?
Look at it, look at it.
It's plenty.
It's plenty?
It's plenty.
It's plenty.
Or should I buy one carton, so that I can keep it for a month.
Look at the carton inside the shop.
Hey!
You have a lot!
X.
I'm coming.
I'll buy fifty.
Uhuh!
Do you have a plastic bag to put it in?
Can you put it in a plastic bag?
Uhuh, I have a plastic bag.
It's leather.
Uh... and what's this one?
This is, is, is s-... is, is... s-... is, is wool for a stove.
Oh oh!
Uhuh.
So, stoves use wool?
Eh.
Uhuh!
When they put it... when they put it on the stove this way, then they'll put in kerosine.
Then you'll...
Ehey ah!
Hm.
If I buy this one now, I'll go buy kerosine again?
Uhuh!
That's it.
Ah!
If you don't buy kerosine, you won't...
I won't be able to cook?
Uhuh!
Uh... what will they eat tonight?
I don't have money for kerosine.
You'll try.
I have kerosine that I can give you half of.
You'll give me... give me kerosine on credit.
Tomorrow I'll pay you.
I don't sell on credit.
You know everything.
You don't sell on credit?
If you give people things, they'll buy it and take it away, they won't remember to bring my money again.
I'll look for it, I'll look and look. I'll say "my daughter bought kerosine and I can no longer see it!"
Hm.
And my money is gone.
Heh!
Your money has gone.
My money has gone.
But I'll keep my promise, I'll bring you your money.
What will you give me?
I'll bring money in uh... two weeks.
Isn't that good?
Two weeks, that's far away.
This one, I'll look, look, and look; I'll search for it, I won't see it.
It's not far.
It's gone, you've run away with my money.
Let me write down my phone number for you.
If you don't see me, you'll call me on my phone.
Wait!
How do they call the phone?
I don't... I don't... I don't know a thing.
You don't know one two three?
Okay, uhuh.
What do we do to it now?
I dunno.
Okay, let me go and borrow money.
Uhuh.
I will go borrow money to come pay you.
Let me go borrow money to pay you.
Go borrow money, go borrow money!
I'll go borrow money.
Borrow money, come.
I'm here, I'll sell it to you.
You'll sell it to me?
Okay!
Let me start checking.
What will I buy again?
It seems like I saw bobo here.
My daughter likes bobo.
There's plenty of everything.
See this one, plenty for soup.
You've got plenty of it?
Plenty of everything.
This one for soup?
Soup?
Okay, if you make it... if you... if you make it like, like this... like this, use it to cook soup, it will be fine.
Okay let me just write my...
Hm.
It's sweet.
It's sweet
I didn't know I'd see one.
You'll eat and eat, your stomach will get big.
Ehey!
Eh, thank God!
Let me go look for money.
I'll come back, mama.
Go, go go.
Thank you.
I'll come back.
You come back quick!
Me, I wanna go to a meeting.
Okay, I will... I'll go.
Hm.
Thanks Ma.
Uh... you've become my customer today.
Bye, my daughter.
Oh.
Please, always come buy from Mama.
I wanna buy everything for the house.
I'll come, I'll buy.
Always come to buy from Mama.
Thank you.
Bye-bye, Mama.
Bye!
Bye!
Bye-bye!
Ah, myself, I have been at home.
Just there.
Uh... one of my guys, a male friend, those days, he called me.
He told me there was a new job that had just come up.
I asked him what kind of job it was.
He told me that uh... he has people who would work... who would do the work.
But, he wants me, who is here, to be the one to do it because he doesn't trust the other... the other people.
So I asked him, "what will the work be like?"
He told me that it’s uh... work in a bush bar.
I told him that since I am, I, I am training for a job.
That I'm... I'm almo... I'm... I'm... I'm... I'm... I am... I'm getting through in uh... in my work.
So he told me I should come and give it a try, so it won't be as if I'm always just staying at home.
I told him no problem, no problem!
He told me I should go.
He will call me.
He will call me when they... when their... when their manager comes back.
So, I was waiting, waiting, waiting.
I didn’t get a call from him.
I called him.
I said "how far now?"
He told me I should just relax.
That the work... the work would soon be ready.
Mstchew, I told him that <igbo> nna omo me <igbo> no problem.
As I was at home, there was no work at the place I was doing my training.
We generally don’t have any work to do.
Mstchew, so I told him, "no problem now, I'll keep waiting for you now."
Then it took like (let's just say) a month.
Let's just say a month, or three weeks.
Hah!
Then he called me again.
He told me "uh, my friend, another job has come up, and it's me who would be in the VIP... VIP bar."
Not in the normal bar on that side.
I told him "Hah! Wow! That one makes sense."
It is as if I... I... I, I was in a hurry, hurry, hurry to come and do this one because he told me that I would just go and relax under the AC, I would relax and work.
Do you understand?
So, mstchew, that's how I asked him, "when... when should I come?"
He told... he told me that I should...
That he would call me when the manager comes.
So as the manager came, he called me, told me that I should come around, around twelve.
So I tell him "Hah, no problem!"
So my sister (my sister and I were in the house) told me "Hah!"
My brother uh, my...
Hah why did I...
Why would I do that work?
Because I, I don’t... mtschew.
It's not like I really like it because the money did not, mtschew the money didn't make sense.
I told him "no problem."
"Let me go, I'll go do it now."
So, then I went.
The guy told me...
Okay, he told me that I should come here.
That the guy who was here, he would uh... teach me some... certain things.
You understand?
So, I told him, "no problem."
So the guy was telling me, he was teaching me, teaching me.
The guy is real... is about to go.
The guy got...
Uh, it's as if he has his uh, national... NYSC.
He wanted to go and do his NYSC.
So, mstchew, so, that’s how, me, I'm here.
So I was here.
The guy is about to go.
Maybe it's today the guy will be leaving.
Me, I will, I will take over.
So mstchew, that’s how, that’s how it is.
That’s how it is, hehe.
As I went there last year, la-, last year, as I came back, everybody was just...
I mean, they were just listening to what, what you wanted...
As they were just listening, they were just looking at my mouth to know what I would say, whether I... my boss and I have had problems.
God, I beg you, just try and help me.
I'm tired of this life.
I, I'm, I'm the first born, uhuh.
God, please!
I'm begging you!
God, I'm begging you, do something!
I'm begging you!
God, I'm begging you!
I'm begging you!
It's what... it's what I need.
Just do something!
Oh!
At the moment, even this uh...
And my brother said I should pray in Port Harcourt.
In Port Harcourt, I didn't... I didn't have the money for the fare; I didn't have the money for the fare.
The fare was...
That... the first day that, that I went, it was... I paid... I paid how much from Onitsha?
One thousand five.
He said he would collect two thousand five.
I didn't have the money.
Money... he would say I should go to OPM.
And that the church is trying their best too.
So, the church is helping too, is helping very many people.
The church is helping very many people.
God, please!
This life, oh!
And at the moment uh... I mean mstchew it's all these things, making me learn this work.
What will I do?
Even if it's, even if it's food, I should just be eating from this side.
As I came back, how many months is it now?
Nine months, I'm in the house, there is nothing.
Huh?
God, please just do something for me now.
Now, I mean I need... I need your help.
Even if it's because of my forefathers, oh God, forgive us.
Just forgive us, please, I beg you.
It's not, not, not, n-... not, my family is not that sinful.
I know a lot of people who did rituals a long time ago.
Our own, not so much.
Or is it just because... that maybe, I don’t know if our fore-... it's our forefathers, who sold people, or are selling, or are burying people alive.
That's what's tormenting us.
We don’t know if anyb-, any, any person who did...
If you did something wrong, have it follow you.
Don't have it follow your children.
God please, the, the thing has, has made me tired.
All these ones, I mean all the... all, all the young people, no one is progressing.
All of the greedy ones are progressing
Moinmoin wants these.
All, all X.
God will deliver me.
Nobody is making progress.
Everybody is just... is looking to their brother.
Who will speak up?
Who will help?
God it's our... we put our trust in you.
But really, wow, my mother is a good woman.
That woman, I will never forget her in my life, even if she dies today, or tomorrow.
But I am praying to God, "God, give her a long life."
That woman's the one who made me what I am today.
The woman really tried her best, she spent a lot.
It was just last week that we went for a family prayer.
And I was thanking God for...
I was praying to God to help out on that side of things, to do something for us.
Please, let God go... let God just try and do something for us there, please.
Mstchew but no.
He's the one who knows as this, this, this, this life... this life...
I wonder... I wonder why... I wonder as mgbe a gasi na uwa ne eme ntughari na eziokwu true.
O ne eme ntughari.
But look how I was when I was with my boss!
Everyday, I, I, I...
Everyday, we were just eating anyhow.
We didn't know that this life has two sides to it.
Now, we have been seeing it now.
Ehn!
Look at how skinny I've become.
At the time, I'd... I'd go and eat suya worth five thousand, and be drinking like I wanted.
Ehn!
We were just... we were just eating shawarma.
We were just smoking, going to club houses.
But now, even eating now is...
It's like, uh, a mountain on fire.
Before you would climb that mountain, uhuh, it would be very hard.
Ehn!
It would be hard.
That's why...
That's why we go begging God.
One!
Two!
God, please, you should just try and help us.
That's the reason why we... why I am begging you.
Ehn?
God, please, I beg you.
We are just begging you.
I'm begging you.
God, we are just, we are just begging you.
God, we are just begging you.
Just help me!
Huh?
Look at my brother, that guy, ah!
My friend... ah my friend, Maxwell.
I spoke about Max-, Ma-, Maxwell.
That uh... that time, mstchew uh... but I...
That guy, I really helped that guy.
I really helped the guy.
When he said that, that time, the guy would...
But the guy had known... sent money to our boss.
The guy had sent money to that man, he bought cattle.
How many cows?
He bought land, he bought a forest.
There's nothing the guy didn't buy, nothing the guy didn't buy.
Even at that time, even as we went... even as we went... even as we went, uh... to my master's village, I was the one who went to find out where the prostitutes were working.
Mstchew I...
Uh, that guy, I miss the guy.
Uh, that guy, I really miss the guy a lot.
I miss the guy a lot.
But I pray to God that one day, we will just go there.
Yesterday, this girl even called me, asking me, "how far now?"
Ahi!
Mstchew guy, this life... this, this, this, this life has two sides.
This life, that's how it is.
Where I am in this life, that's how life is.
That's how this life is.
Okay this place, uh... D-Morris, as we went to D-Morris, we said we would eat eba at D-Morris.
Well, so it's uh... Fabian, uh... Paul, uh... and one... and Chima and I.
One is...
Okay it's not...
Chima didn't follow us.
If Chima had followed us, uh... he would... uh... he would have beaten my record.
Because Chi-... Chima is someone who will cook five cups of rice and nearly finish it, all by himself.
Now we are at D-Morris eating eba.
Then...
That time, food was really cheap.
So that was how we ordered.
Eba thirt-... eba...
I think uh... the eba was one fifty or so.
I can't remember anymore.
But there was plenty.
So we ate and ate!
Actually we finished it.
Lilian, that was when Lilian arrived.
Funny enough, this Lil-... silly Lilian girl, if she... a guy took her to D-Morris to eat, then she would be acting like a big babe, a big chick.
She didn't talk to me that day.
She just looked at me, smiled, took her f-... as if she didn't notice how we were teasing each other.
Then Lilian saw me on the church ground.
She looked at me.
Lilian raised her hand.
Bi-... big girl who acts like uh... a sophisticated babe carrying an apple on her head.
Hi eba eater!
That she didn't know I eat eba like that.
I said what?
That’s how it is.
So she's the one who designed the first website for UI at that time.
That time you...
In fact, the website was like uh... magic.
It was like white man's magic.
And she's al-...
Also she was studying computer science, and she was in her final year.
So she was doing her final year project, and she designed a mini website for the University of Ibadan.
And the only place where she could do it was in the administrative office.
And you know that...
Because we, we, we now know a lot of people.
I don't know what took us there...
So it was there, I saw her there sitting down looking like...
In fact, she was looking... she looked... she looked so miserable like it was a punishment because she didn't have a choice.
So as she saw us, then her face brightened with a smile.
She was happy we came.
She said we shouldn't go.
I said "what, we shouldn't go?"
So, let them take my matriculation number and take it up to the senate chambers.
I said "no, I am leaving you here."
"This is your problem, keep dealing with it!"
Hehehe!
So the...
That was how I cancelled the eleba story.
So anytime she wanted to talk about the eleba, I just said "am I the one who gave you an assignment?"
I went to the office to work on the website.
So, so if, if uh... any... if you, you, you took yourself to D-Morris, or go to NISER Park.
Okay, that's where you went.
That was why she...
That was why she pinned everybody because all those places where guys are, ah there are so many!
Uh... NISER park, you know this swimming pool?
Opposite the swimming pool, that typing pool, you know there used to be a lot of eating joints?
In fact, there is one...
Uh... what's that guy's name again?
That guy does uh... he makes this uh... mstchew toasted bread, toasted chicken, and all the rest.
And at that time, the thing was not cheap at all!
Chicken and chips they sold for two hundred and fifty naira at that time, the two hundred and fifty was really big money!
Wow!
Serious money!
So, there was one stupid thing I did one day, each time I remember, I just look at myself and I just laugh at myself.
There was one, uh... one of my friends, this chick (in fact, I would say she was my first girlfriend), so she and I really connected well.
So, as it was...
When I went to her house, she introduced me to her younger brother.
Her younger brother really liked me and got along with me well.
I don't know what we were discussing one day.
Then we...
Eveybody was acting up, we were boasting that ah!
He said, ah!
I said chicken, and chips.
And they... I said chicken and chips.
It was then they si-... we should say have-... uh... cooled down.
Chicken and chips, it was like it should be...
While I was making fun of him, he said he had never eaten it, really.
To tell you the truth, he had really never eaten it before, honestly, he was not lying, if I would... if, if I could buy it for him, he wouldn't mind.
As I wanted to act like a big brother, I said no problem at all.
We'd see what we'd do about it.
Then I started to save.
Uh, this thing took me about three weeks, for only two hundred and fifty naira.
If I had money, at least, I would have saved up to five hundred naira.
I would buy his own, buy mine, we would sit down and eat.
But as the day we fixed for going to eat chi-... together was approaching, I couldn't disappoint him as I wanted to show I was a big boy.
So that was how I shamefully...
I shamefully went with him.
I bought chicken and chips for two hundred and fifty naira for the monkey boy.
You wouldn't believe how this idiot turned his back to me and ate everything up.
He didn't even offer me a single chip!
Please!
Then the...
You wouldn't guess what the moron asked me, "won't you buy anything for yourself?"
I said no, no, no.
I said they... I didn't... I didn't really want to eat.
I shamefully bought Krest.
Krest, which they sell...
It's like they sell Krest.
Man, I can't remember no... but Krest was not too expensive.
I was sipping Krest and... because of my stomach.
I was sipping Krest because of my stomach.
I was sipping Krest thinking of the idiot monkey!
God will punish you there!
Yes, thunder will strike you!
That, that, that, that your...
See mstchew!
I was just...
The stupid boy didn't even mind me.
He just cleared the plate.
Completely!
He cracked the bones!
You know the bones are not very strong.
The guy ate the bones and everything.
Wow!
That was when I got riled up and said come on, leave the bones, are you crazy?
Is he crazy?
Hm... the gbu-... the boy has no shame.
He us crazy.
Is it because it's his first time he's had chicken and chips?
He ate it, ate everything.
Wow!
I was just looking at the guy saying "look at this idiot!"
He did not even say I should take some to eat.
Both of us should...
So when he finished eating it...
After we finished eating that day, as I was cursing him on the way, he took...
I didn't know the moron would go to tell his sister "I bought chicken and chips."
Then she started begging him for chicken and chips again.
Uh... you see as he was saying we, but he didn't give me any.
He said he would finish everything.
So I was just looking at him.
I was hungry for it.
Where would I buy another one for myself?
No, no.
I thought "It's your last card."
"Hehe, take my own!"
Okay, you know it was my last card.
So, so I said "Okay, it serves you right."
It's good for you to do it like that.
Life for me as a child was a bit hard.
In fact, I really suffered.
And the reason is that my mother died early.
I am the last child in my family.
So, I have three older siblings.
So, since my mother has died s-, died, all the things a mother... a mother provides for a child, my mother was not there to provide for me.
So, I was just managing to go to school.
As hard as things were, I paid attention to my studies.
Because I didn't want the suffering to last for long. So I was serious with my schooling.
Anything we were taught, I would pay attention.
And another thing that helped me was the fact that all those things we were supposed to take to school, like books, textbooks, pens, pencils... me, I did not have much of all that stuff.
So the method I used was that my friends whose mothers were rich, whose parents were rich, do bring those things to school, so I would help them with their assignments.
I would explain the things they do not understand to them, so that they would give me one of those things for me to use.
I did not know that as I was doing these things, my teacher was paying attention.
He was looking at me.
He then noticed that this person who... ah, ah!, as it so happens, she's the only one who doesn't have things, she, she, she... her uniform looks like rags, she doesn't have books, she doesn't bring food to school, and she still does better than the others.
Ah!
So, I was amazed to notice after a while that he would call me and give me food to eat.
He would give me some money.
Ah!
I didn't know he was paying attention to me as I was helping those people.
So, he developed a special kindness for me.
So much that, sometimes, even things I didn't understand... he would call me aside, and explain to me.
So, all this made me get serious about my studies.
I paid serious attention to it.
Then everyone noticed me in school.
Then it started helping my performance.
I'm the one who ended up being at the top of the class.
That's how it went on, from primary one until I got to primary four.
As God would help me, I took the common entrance examination in primary four.
Then, I was given a scholarship.
That was how I got into secondary school.
As I was about to enter into secondary school, my mother's younger sister who stays in Lagos said she wanted to help my father.
She said I should come with her to stay in Lagos.
I was very excited.
I thought, "ah, at least I won't suffer anymore like I am now."
So, I followed her to Lagos.
I didn't know the hardship would be twice as bad in Lagos.
So, I... I got to Lagos.
So all the work in the house would be done by me.
I would be the one not to go to school as early as everyone else.
I would be the one to wash the dishes.
I would be the one who didn't get to go to bed early.
I would still be in the kitchen at ten o'clock, cooking.
That's how it was.
It was so painful to me.
I would be crying.
But I didn't know that I didn't have the choice.
It was... let me just put s-... more effort into the work I was doing.
That was how I was just doing it.
At school, I started using the same methods I used in primary school.
There was someone I liked at my school, a teacher.
I liked the way the teacher used to dress.
The teacher was staying around my house.
So one day, the teacher and I boarded the same bus.
The teacher asked me, uh... if I was staying with my mother.
She said she noticed that everybody comes to school early but I would be the one to come to school late.
And she used to see me fully dressed by six o'clock.
I would have started walking on the streets.
I told my teacher, "well, she's not my mom".
I said she's my mom's younger sister.
I said if I wake up early, she would ask me to go to the shop first, to go and carry things, arrange things, before I went to school.
So that's it, that one, that made me arrive late.
Then my teacher told me not to worry.
She said that's how it was.
She said the only thing that will make all this suffer... suffering come to an end would be putting more efforts into my studies.
So I carried on.
What the woman told me was stuck in my mind.
It made me cry a bit, but she said I shouldn't worry.
She consoled me.
She said I shouldn't worry.
She said I should just keep doing all these things... but I should be praying.
And I should also pay attention to my studies.
I did as she said.
I did...
I took my exams; I finished secondary school; I took the WAEC exam.
I didn't do very well on the WAEC.
I got four credits.
Ah! It was as if uh... I dunno.
I lost hope a bit about my chances of taking the WAEC again.
During those holidays after sitting for the WAEC, I registered for some extra classes.
Now these... some of the friends I made at the centre told me they had some se-... young people at home, would I mind teaching them?
Then, I said no problems.
I said I could do it.
That's how I started teaching them at home and saving some money.
Then I sat for the JAMB.
I sat for the first JAMB.
I didn't do very well.
It was Law I wanted to study but I didn't get in.
I still didn't get discouraged.
Then, I sat for the JAMB a second time.
And by the luck of God, I passed.
So I got into a higher institution.
When I was in the higher institution, there were some people I liked and saw at my school.
There was a woman uh... the woman, there was this way everybody respected her.
She spoke really good English.
In fact, anywhere she went, people followed her.
They would be saying, "yes ma... yes ma."
I was looking at her uh... why is everybody following this woman? Why is it this woman is standing up?
Even if men stood up to greet her... everybody would be saying, "yes ma, yes ma."
Everybody would be rushing to carry her bag.
Everybody would be opening the door for her.
I was suprised.
They said it's because she's educated.
They said she had the highest qualifications.
So I said, "so, if I also become as educated as her, that's how they will respect me."
Ah!
Then I said, "okay, if it was this woman's level of education that made everybody..."
In fact, if you saw the car she was riding at the time... her car was the nicest in the school.
Then I said, "if it really was her level of education that took her this far, if I also get to this level, everyone will respect me too."
That made me study more.
Since no one respected me, everyone would abuse me, I was the one doing... I was the one working last in the house, I was the one doing the worst chores, I was the one going to bed last, so I said, "okay, if I put more efforts into my studies, everyone... the impression they have about me will change."
That's why I put in more effort.
I became very serious with my studies.
Then I said, "okay, if... after this first degree... if this woman has a PhD, I will also get a PhD."
If she has more than a PhD, I will get more than a PhD.
Then I became serious.
I did more.
I continued to do more.
I did more and more and more.
I passed my exams.
I got good grades.
I went for Youth Service.
At some points during the Service Corps, you know, I...
As it is with women, no matter what your level of education is, you must get married.
If you don't get married, it becomes a problem.
So, I got married.
It wasn't easy to continue, but God...
By God's grace, my husband is like if God put his love for me into his mind.
So I told him, "uh... my husband, there is something I want to do, please."
"My dream is to be well educated."
"And I haven't reached the level I planned to get to."
Then he said, "no problem."
He said whatever makes me happy will make him happy.
So, if it's to... if I want to go to school, that won't be a problem.
So, he supported me.
Then I came in for a Masters program.
As soon as I came in for the Masters program, I realized...
Me who thought I would be the oldest person, then I realised there were people even older than me, old women who were around my mother's age, they were co-... they were... we were in the same class.
People who were almost my dad's age, they were in the same class.
And as we were there, that's how (as I was reading), they were... some of them were even doing better than me.
One day as we were talking, uh... I heard them say uh... after the Masters program, they will go on and get a PhD.
I said uh... if as old as you all are, you still want to get a PhD, and I am still a child compared to you all, I should also get a PhD.
And all the people that were our lecturers were very young, that is they were my age.
Ah!
One person, one wo-...
There was a woman, who came to class, they said she was a professor.
I said Professor!
When did this woman start school?
They said "it's the same..."
I said, "oh, if this woman is a professor, I will also be a profe-... will be a professor."
So, I finished the Masters program.
I c-...
As I finished the Masters program, God helped me.
I got a PhD grade.
Then I said, "okay Boss, I have finished this program but we won't stop here. I still want to keep going."
He said, "no problem now."
If that's what I want, that's what he wants.
Whatever I want in life, he will support me.
That was how I came to collect the form and started this PhD we're running now.
So, I pray that when we finish this program, God will provide a job.
May God make us happy.
This one, they call it Igue Festival.
Igue Festival is what they call it.
So, it's the Edo people.
They're the ones who do this festival.
It's towards the end of the year, after Christmas, between Christmas and the New Year, around the twenty seventh, twenty eighth of December.
Uh... that’s when they do the festival.
So, all the Edo people who have moved to different places, everybody will head back home.
This festival, they do it to thank the gods of Edo land for all the good things they've done, for the good harvest, for bringing the people peace, giving the people good health, you know.
So they have to do that festival every year, to thank the gods.
So, many things happen before the festival.
Ah, a lot of preparation goes into it.
It's no small thing.
Everybody will go to the market, buy food, fill the house with food.
Rice.
Goat.
In fact, it's goats we slaughter for that festival.
Yes now!
For that one, mostly, it's the children who eat rice.
But the main food is pounded yam.
Pounded yam, and egusi soup.
A hot, hot one.
Ah, pounded yam, that's the main food.
So, before the festival, everybody will start to cook.
People whose house, has... all the paint has fallen off, we paint our houses again.
Then we'll wash everywhere in the house, uh... clean up the whole place.
It'll be spotless everywhere.
Then we'll buy new clothes, and new shoes for the kids.
Even if the adults couldn't buy anything so far, they'll buy for the children.
Then, before the day of the festival or so, there is a particular leaf.
That leaf uh... where it is in the bush, in fact, only God who knows where that leaf is.
There are some people who go far, far inso... into the bush.
They call the leaf Ewere leaf.
That leaf... that leaf, they say it represents peace.
So the uh... Benin people consider it a leaf that represents peace... which shows peace.
So they will go and pluck that leaf, cut it into very small pieces, put it into a calabash, pour water on it.
Then, the Oba of Benin will pray on top of that calabash.
So on the day... the, the, the... early in the morning of that festival, even before we wake up, around four or five, so peo-... some people will carry the leaf around the whole of Benin from house to house.
Any house, any compound which they get to like this uh... they will start knocking.
If there is a gate, they will start knocking on the gate.
They will be singing as they come.
There will be a band playing.
Let me sing the song for you.
Ah! I like that song!
When I was a little kid, ah! That song was great.
I'll tell you.
Wait first!
Just listen first!
That’s how they'll be singing it when they're coming.
Once you hear that song uh... no matter how deep you're sleeping, or how you dream, you just have to wake up.
You will open the gate for them.
They say, "ah, Ewere is coming!"
"Open the gate to..."
"Open your door to Ewere."
You know that that the Ewere leaf is, is peace.
That’s what it means.
So you must open up.
Peace is coming to your house!
Open up, let peace come in!
So they sing, praising the god of peace.
So as you open your door to let them in, it's like you accept peace, and you accept the God of peace, and peace will be in your house.
So for the following year, you have already settled your peace.
So everybody will quickly open their door.
They will come inside, start sprinkling the water from the leaf.
So you'll be trying to make sure that at least one drop of the water touches your body.
You will bring out all the children.
They will be sprinkling the water.
The leaf, everybody will (even if you got only one)... will hang it on their door where all the evil spirits will see it.
So when they come and see the Ewere leaf like this, they will run away saying, "guys, this house is a no go area!"
Different... different people, will carry ca-...
You know that Benin is big, right?
Uhuh!
There are different... different areas, yeah.
So, maybe people from the palace or... they will come, they will be spreading the thing.
So it is very interesting.
That one is in the very early morning of the day of the festival.
Then there are some rituals which the Oba will perform in the palace, you know, by noon... in the afternoon.
So, everybody will start slaughtering their goats.
They have some kinds of incantations, some kinds of thing they will do.
They start slaughtering the goats, then they begin pounding yam.
They will then begin serving the food.
That one, to me, is the sweetest part.
They start serving the food, taking some to relatives, giving some to friends, neighbors.
And you know, when we were young, any child who brings food to your house like that, you must give him money.
So we really liked doing it because the number if houses you take food to, you will...
It means that the amount of money you'll collect that day won't be small.
So, there will be plenty of food.
We will eat really well.
And relatives who have come from different places, you know, will be around.
The music will be loud.
We will be dancing, you know.
It is very interesting.
Then the Oba of Benin will, will address the people, those who went to the palace.
He will address them, you know.
He will tell the people how to... how we should behave, even the kinds of things we will do so that uh... the gods will not get angry with us.
You know, all those kinds of things.
That period uh... no markets will be open!
Nobody will... nobody will...
In fact, it’s even against the law to open the market, to sell a single thing.
All shops, everywhere, will close down, yes, so that it wants to... you want to respect the gods during that period.
But these days now ah, the Church has been preaching against all those kinds of things o.
Uhuh.
The Church has been preaching against it.
They say all those kinds of things are... are rituals, are the Devil.
People use all those kinds of things to worship him.
So as people are becoming Christians now, the festival doesn't carry as much weight as before.
But they are still doing it!
They are still doing it.
Every year, they have to do it.
So that's how the festival is, very, very, very interesting.
Ah if, if you... if, if, if you want to witness it uh... around the twenty seventh, twenty eighth, just come to Benin.
Come and see the festival.
Very interesting.
Even the masquerades, they are coming out.
Hey now!
You will... you can come now, no problem.
Masquerades will come out.
Ah they will be dancing.
But women don’t get close to masquerades!
They sure don't!
If you get close to masquerades in Benin lands, as a woman, they could flog you.
So it's taboo for women to go.
So it's from a distance that... that women look at them.
Uhuh, but men can get close to them.
Because they see those uh... masquerades as uh... the representatives...
They see them as spirits.
They see them as the god... the spirits which the gods sent to bless us.
So we can't just go near them.
Ah, they respect them very well.
So once the masquerades dance out like that, you will see how people throw money at them.
They throw money at them.
As they are throwing money at them, as if they are asking for prayers, they are asking for blessings.
Things have been so hard that if a man and a woman like each other and say to each other "we'll get married tomorrow. You will be faithful to me alone. Don't be faithful to another person.", it's a lie!
It doesn't work like that.
That agreement we had, one of us will go and break it.
Uh... I know the question you're asking.
What you want to know is why they will go and ruin it.
Good.
You see uh... on this first point, let me be the first to talk.
Why will men cheat on women?
You see, men, as they are, they have too many bad friends.
I am not talking about you.
And the friends, they're so en-... he-... they lead them astray.
So those ones, even the pastors you see around, who go to church, yeah, are not left out.
Yes indeed!
When they meet and talk privately, one pastor will tell the other uh... you know we are humans, so God understands.
Then you who's never done it, would think it's true. It's not a big deal. It is a minor sin.
So, they influence each other.
That's what makes...
That's what I've seen.
Men cheat because the circle of friends they follow around, they don't see it as a big deal if you're not faithful to one woman.
In fact, it'll look like you're stupid.
In this generation of ours now, being with only one woman, you don't have shortcuts (They call it shortcuts! Yes!), if you don't have shortcuts, what will you be like?
Are you Jesus?
That's how they are.
And it's what I see.
Yes.
So, they are...
The cheating that is going on now, uh... from men's side, it's the type of friends they have, they are the ones teaching them how to cheat.
And I really mean it, so much that those who go to church are not left out.
If you don't have good friends, you will go to church (you know) and you will still cheat.
Yes mtschew, man, are you open? Do you understand?
Do you get around?
If you don't go around, it's as if you're not aware of the things going on around you.
You don't go out!
Go out!
Men cheat everywhere.
Women also cheat but men cheat more.
And I'm telling you the reason why they cheat.
Uh?
This is because their friends encourage them.
They don't have friends who will tell them that it's very bad.
In fact, their friends will make it look like you don't know what's up if you don't cheat.
How can you just say you will be faithful to only one woman?
That is a big problem that makes cheating happen in relationships.
Then, the other thing that happens is that the women themselves are bad.
We are the ones working against ourselves.
If not, if a man asks the secretary out, and the secretary knows that a lady comes to see her boss, it means you know this boss has a wife.
How come, when the boss started flirting with you, when he started asking you out, you also agreed?
You are not supposed to agree.
So, apart from the fact that men are not focused (That's how we say it in pidgin. They're not focused. They don't have good friends.), we women, we're bad too.
We are working against ourselves.
This is because if you said no, the man would walk away.
But if you give in, yes, the show begins.
Yes.
You call it a business, but I call it a show.
Yes.
Then, you see this cheating we are talking about uh... mtshew, our culture is bad.
In this Nigeria we're in, if I am going out with your brother and your brother cheats on me, if I report him to you, you know what you will tell me now.
Ah!
You'll ask me if he was circumcised for my sake alone.
A woman once said to a girl, "why do you say he should not flirt with another woman?"
"Is it because of you alone I circumcised my child?"
So, culture itself does not help in this matter at all.
You will go and report to the mother and the mother will ask you, "why? Let my child taste!"
"Tasting" they call it.
Let him taste other women.
Yes, that is it!
Then you see this issue of cheating, I am talking about the men's.
Women's own uh... is more serious.
Yes.
Then you see this cheating men indulge in, some women have money.
They use it to catch men like this.
They will buy them.
But a man who you know is married, whose wife is managing, when he tells you he wants to celebrate his birthday, you will go and buy him an iPad, and the, all those other big things you give as gifts.
The greedy man then will begin to say madam, thank...
Madam, Madam will soon become your name.
Then he'll start calling you by your name.
Uh... Titi uh... thank you for yesterday.
From there, bad things start happening.
So, because men are greedy, they're looking for better places.
The wife at home can't buy them an iPad for their birthday.
The rich women who know how to start making men sleep with them, if they like you, they will start buying nice things for you.
So indiscipline.
I call that indiscipline.
Apart from greed on the part of the man, it's indiscipline.
Good.
Then, personally and finally, the women in the house, the wives at home, they are making some men cheat.
We know ourselves.
Some men, as they are, they cannot control their body.
They like their body to touch other bodies.
But you see, some women, uh... there is that time when we say we have a headache, we are not well, we did this, we did that.
Ah!
Wherever a man will come, he will come.
You, you will be the only one to open your mouth and ask, "please, is sex a kind of food?"
Lea-... leave me... leave me... leave me... leave me alone.
Is that not so?
Men will just go and cheat on you!
So, we women at home, we are the wives, uh... we contribute to why men cheat.
And some wo-... some women are dirty!
Oh!
Mtshew oh Jesus!
You...
A man whose secretary uses deodarants, perfumes and some other sweet... long-lasting and sweet-smelling things... you have been in the house all day and you have not even brushed your teeth.
Let alone take a shower.
When your man comes home, do you expect him to give in to you?
If you see the skimpy skirts these young girls wear nowadays uh... they are witches!
Those girls... Ah! They are real witches.
But if the woman in the house could try not to be too fat!
Package!
They call it packaging.
Package yourself well.
Uh... I am not... hehe!
Package yourself well.
E-..., e-..., e-...
Some men even like women to be full-figured.
They call women like that 'grab something women'.
Ah, let me grab some!
Yes, so, the woman should try to be...
If you are full-figured, pack it well.
Your man will like it.
Then, as for women, why do they cheat?
Uh...
You know women uh... as you are seeing them over there hey!
Hm!
How shall I put it?
They are not satisfied with little things.
Since our university days, this my husband has never bought me a phone.
It's a cheap phone.
Meanwhile, this friend of mine, her husband bought her this and that.
It... it gets them worried.
Their brain doesn't... it doesn't get tuned to the right place.
Yes, that's greed!
I said it.
Women are very greedy.
You can also call it indiscipline.
You can still call it...
How can I even put it?
So, such women uh... at any available opportunity, they sure will cheat on the man.
Even if you are married to her, or you're still dating, they will cheat on their man.
Do you understand me, man?
Then, you see those women over there, don't you?
Hum!
Men, as they are, uh... we call them predators.
Predators.
They will...
Yes!
Once they see a woman they like, they will move heaven and earth.
They must... they must get that woman.
So it will take the grace of God for a wo-... wo-... a woman that a man will tell, "I must get you" like this, it will take the grace of God for her not to fall.
Because...
Eh, what?
Am I talking to you?
So, because the man, uh... He will study you, study everything.
Your...
He will understand what you suffer from, what you need.
Then he'll start giving you those things
May God catch you!
If your husband starts misbehaving or if he is not serious, you will just fall.
There are a lot of things I don’t like about a lot of people.
But to tell you this kind of thing that...
Except if I want to call the person by name.
But it's not good for someone to call a person by name.
So I will tell you a story.
This story, they told me when I was in primary school.
And they told me the story in Pidgin.
And I will try to remember everything that happened in the story as the guy said it.
But that guy, he knows how to tell stories really well.
That guy, I admired him when we were in primary school at that time.
He said he wanted to tell us a story, and all of us should listen.
Then he started.
He said, "story, story."
Then we said, "story."
"Story, story."
"Story."
He said that the name of the story that he wanted to tell was "The story of Alaska Pepper."
Aha, so who is this Alaska Pepper?
Why did he have a name like Alaska Pepper?
"Pepper" is even in the name.
He told us to listen, keep quiet, and let him tell us this story.
Alaska Pepper was a little boy.
Nobody liked Alaska Pepper in the place where they were staying.
In that area, Alaska Pepper was always causing trouble.
If anything went wrong, you would call Alaska Pepper's name.
If you saw a pot on the ground, a pot that was dirty, a pot that was dented, you knew it was Alaska Pepper's fault.
If you saw a pot that was broken, you knew it was Alaska Pepper.
Anywhere trouble was passing through, that's the kind of place Alaska Pepper was heading.
So people did not like him.
So Alaska Pepper was always doing, doing things that people didn't like in the community.
But Alaska Pepper was one kind of person that people didn't like.
But there were things that were... that were going on in Alap-... Alaska Pepper's mind.
So in that town where they were, there were days which were... they were calling their market days.
Women, everybody in different villages, would bring their different things.
Cassava, pepper, garri, uh... different things, they would carry them on their heads.
They would go to this one market.
That market is Agbadu Market.
Before they would get there, some would cross Ikpoba, Ikpoba River... before they would reach it.
Some people were coming from another place which they called Enyan.
From different places, they would gather in that market.
So, there was a period when the market would start in the morning.
It's in the evening people would leave to go there.
Because people went there on foot in those days.
They would leave the house early in the morning, and once they reached the place, they would display all the things they had brought.
Then people would stay and start buying.
So, it's in that kind of place, that's where Alaska Pepper, (that kind of a place where that market was, A... Agbadu) that's where Alaska Pepper grew up.
Then, they knew that Alaska Pepper was not a good kid.
That it was bad things and bad people that Alaska Pepper was following.
So something happened then.
Nobody knew how to... to call... to call the thing.
One kind of a monster was just coming out from the bush.
Because at that time, it was like they wanted to do one big festival in Benin.
So people were really coming to the market.
Children were following their moms and dads to the market.
So at that time, the monster would just come out from the bush.
It would see a child, it would take it away.
Aha! People were wondering: three people went to the market, only two came back.
Another uh... another four people...
Two women would go, maybe one person, no, only she would come back.
They took the story to the palace.
They took it everywhere.
Come and see what's happening!
It's like something is happening to us whenever we go to the market.
When we go to the market, someone will not come back.
Then the, the king said he had heard about the matter, he would do something.
So the king told everybody to come.
All the elders, then he told them, you see what our people are complaining about. The market is a place where they can't go anymore.
Because now it's like... because the thing is happening very often, they are not going to the market, they... like they used to.
So some people were staying at home.
When the market day came, they would look for something else to do with their goods.
Some people, their goods started to rot in the field.
They were not taking them to the market.
So the king said he knew what to do.
Then he said all his best uh... his best uh... soldiers, should go to the market.
So soldiers should go to the market.
They should be waiting for the animal to come out.
So when the animal comes out, when the animal sees that they are soldiers, it won't see all those people, at once, it will go away.
So when the animal saw that it was all soldiers that were coming, it... the animal caught one.
When they started shooting at the... ehen... the animal with their bows and arrows (the monster which had come out)...
I have started calling it an animal now.
I will tell you why I am calling it an animal.
Because nobody could describe it.
Because its head, it was like a cow's head; its leg, it had a tail like a monkey's; its hand, it was like that..., it was like that of a human being; its body, it was like... it was as if it was a pig's body.
So, the only way you could describe it is that the animal is a monster.
So, the monster was catching people at that time.
So, when the soldiers the king sent wanted to shoot (who sent him), sent... wanted to shoot the thing with their bows and arrows, they would not go in.
They would fall away.
So nobody could kill it.
So once it had caught somebody, the thing would carry them into the bush.
So some people went to consult with native doctors.
They prepared a strong traditional medicine that we call jazz.
So they prepared it, and then put it into their gun.
They shot the thing, it would not go in; the bullet would fall to the ground.
So, when that kind of thing started happening, people started to run, they started trying all kinds of different methods.
Some people would use a cutlass.
They would sharpen both sides of the cutlass, stab at the thing.
They would stab at it, the thing would not... it wouldn't go in.
They said what kind of thing is this?
So then the king called everybody back, and said, "see... that time, he had sent only his soldiers, but now, anybody... if you are a hunter, whatever you are, you should try."
If you can kill... if you can kill this... kill this animal... see the... see the big thing he will do for you.
So he told them that a very big piece of land, plus one of his... his children, a... his daughter, that's what he would give them.
So then they said, "okay."
So then lots of different people, they formed different groups.
Some were hunters, some soldiers, some uh... some, area boys.
All of them got together.
Even Alaska Pepper also had the ambition of killing this uh... monster which nobody could kill.
So, since the thing was only coming out on market days, everybody was ready.
They went looking for this animal.
They were looking for it.
Some went to the bush, some to the road, some to the back of the market.
They were looking for the animal.
When the time came for the animal to come out, it came out.
Everybody was trying different things, trying and trying different things.
It didn't work.
The animal still took the one it wanted to carry into the bush.
So every day, people were staying outside.
Different groups (soldiers, hunters), were everywhere, waiting for this animal, doing their best.
Ak-... as I said before, some prepared some traditional medicine.
Some had tied a red cloth around their head, some had tied a red uh... this thing on their...
Some had dipped uh... this thing of theirs in poison.
Some lit a big fire and put them in.
They said maybe the thing's skin is really dry.
Then they made... they sharpened their arrows very well.
They put them in the fire, and left them there so they would be hot, so that anytime the animal came out, they would use their red hot arrows to shoot it with.
So they tried different methods.
So early one morning, Alaska Pepper came to do something in the house.
They were... they were looking for him.
Then he ran away from the house.
So as he got going, he put some stones in his pocket, and the slingshot he had, he put it in his pocket.
So he was going.
As he got to this place, (which was... because anytime they were looking for him after he did something bad, he would run there and played near the river), so, it was... as he was running to that place to go and play, he ran into the animal on the road.
As he ran into it, he looked at it, the animal looked at him.
He wanted to start running away.
He said, aha, if he ran back to that side, the trouble he had started, they would punish him for that.
That was how he looked at this animal, then he remembered that some stones and a slingshot were in his pocket.
He took the first one, he shot it.
It hit his chin, it fell on the ground.
So the thing came nearer.
Then he grabbed another stone, shot it, it hit the thing in the eye.
The thing shook.
Aha!
So Alaska Pepper put his hand into his pocket, and pulled out the third stone.
He shot it in the mouth.
It swallowed it.
Alaska Pepper was happy.
Then he put his hand into his pocket again, and pulled out another one.
He shot it, and then the animal started shaking.
He put his hand in his pocket again, pulled out a stone (the fifth one) and shot it.
The animal started walking, it walked like it was drunk, it was staggering.
The animal even had a swagger.
While it was coming to get Alaska Pepper, Alaska Pepper pulled out stone number six.
He shot at the animal.
Then the animal stood still, it looked at Alaska Pepper.
As it tried to catch him, Alaska Pepper just shot the last stone at it.
The last stone.
Stone number seven.
As he shot the last stone at the animal, the animal looked at Alaska Pepper, and it just fell.
That was how the animal died.
So Alaska Pepper said what is he going to do now, a... now that he'd killed this animal?
He got scared.
Then he took out a small knife.
There was a small knife that we used to make back in those days, that kind of knife.
Before using uh... one kind of thing, we would sharpen it on the ground.
Uhuh, that kind of knife.
He then managed... he used it to cut off the animal's tail.
He put it somewhere.
Then he cut off the... one of the legs and took it.
He cut off one of its ears, and he took all of them.
He then carried it to that place where he used to play, and he left it there; he forgot about it.
Then he played, played, played, played and played.
When it was time, it was evening time when he realized that dinner would be ready at home, then he ran.
He ran to the house.
So he was on the road when he heard mom's voice saying, "where has this child gone to?"
So he ran.
By that time, they had...
People had forgotten... had forgotten what was happening.
So that was how Alaska Pepper went, he had forgotten what he had done.
He had gone to sleep.
The next day, as people were going to the river, they saw the animal on the ground.
Aha!
Then some people ran to tell the king.
"Come and see!"
This animal that'd been haunting us for so long, this animal which was spoiling our market, which was stealing our people, the animal had died.
So they looked there... went to look at it.
They saw that the animal truly had died.
So they said, "aha, who killed this animal?"
Then they looked at it, one leg was missing.
They looked at it, and they saw that one tail was missing.
They looked at it, and they saw that one ear was missing.
Aha!
So they told the king.
So the king said, "who could do this kind of thing?"
Then the king said, "okay, the person who killed this animal should come and show himself."
"He should come and tell the king that he's the one who killed it."
"If you come, you should bring all those different parts of the animal which you... which you killed, which you cut off."
"Those things are what'll show it’s you who killed it."
So some people went to the market.
Some bought a cow and cut off the leg.
Some bought a goat.
They came, they brought it to where they put the animal in the palace.
They came, they measured it, they said, "no, this isn't the one."
They brought another one, they said, "this isn't the one."
That was how they did it.
Everyone went there.
They didn't find the person who killed the animal.
So when Alaska Pepper woke up, he went to play, and he saw people gathered in the palace, standing outside, they were doing something, he saw that some people were bringing cow legs.
So he asked another boy, "what are they doing over there?"
So the boy said, "haven't you heard?"
"That monster that was taking our people away, they've killed it."
Some people were bringing different things.
Then they measured them, they still could not find the real person who had killed the animal.
That was when Alaska Pepper remembered that all those different things he had cut off from the animal, he had kept them in the bush.
So he didn't say anything.
Then he ran home, he went to take a bag, he ran to the place and he packed everything.
So, when everybody left the palace, he was the only one left there.
He didn't know a chief was there, guarding the place.
He was just in a corner.
So, Alaska Pepper went there.
He brought the thing there.
As he threw it to the ground, he put it there.
He put down the ear, he put down the tail.
Then the man jumped out.
Ala-... Alaska Pepper was shocked.
He wanted to run away.
Then the man said come, come, come, come, come, come.
He then took him to gi-... meet the king, and he said, "look at him, look at the boy who killed the animal, look at the different parts he cut off the animal!"
Then he king said everybody should come.
Look at the person who did this, this big thing for this village.
It was this sm-... this boy, who killed this animal.
Now everybody, all the young people who were in the community, a... who were in that village, all of them rushed out.
They carried Alaska Pepper up, they were hailing Alaska Pepper, they danced round the village.
That was how, that story of that boy became uh... a story they are still telling today in that vilage, of how Alaska Pepper saved them.
This is the little story I said I should tell you.
You should know that the kind of people you say are no good today, tomorrow, they could become the kind of person who, they would... who will be doing a lot of good things tomorrow.
So if you don’t mind uh... that's where I would take my story... that's where I would end my story.
Babe, how are you?
I'm fine.
How are you?
I'm not great.
I won't lie to you.
What happened to you?
It's, it's about that thing I've been telling you since first year.
First year has passed, second year has passed and third year has passed.
So, you can't pity someone?
That...
I have told you.
You, you don't listen.
I've told you that I am not interested in all those problems that you are talking about.
I didn't talk... I didn't talk about problems.
It's a problem for me.
I'm not interested at all.
It's a big problem for me.
No, no.
It's love I am talking about.
It's love.
Something very interesting.
Uhuh, is it very interesting?
You understand? You understand?
In first year, you've read books, read books in second year and in third year, you read.
In fourth year, it's not books I want to take home to meet my mom.
Uhuh, Shully!
You, I have known you in this campus for a long time.
I see different girls in your room.
Say what?
So don't just come and tell me that you are interested in me because I know that you want to play, play around.
Ah!
Babe!
Mtchew!
You're not ready to settle down.
Tah!
For me, I'm not ready to play games.
No.
Oh yeah?
So, leave me on my own.
Babe!
Babe, forget it!
No problem at all.
What I'm talking to you about is that those people you are seeing in my room, they came for tutoring.
Tutoring?
It's tutoring, it's tutoring.
Ah, you know the kind of person that is in the department.
It's almighty, you know!
Playful person.
So, people feel they're approchable.
So, they have to meet someone and go, okay guy, come and explain something.
So, all those girls you have been seeing, came for tutoring.
Eh, just forget it.
It's tutoring.
Okay, I've heard you but I know one girl that's in our department that I know you and her are are very close and not just close as friends.
The two of you are dating.
You're in a very serious relationship.
I, I don't want someone to beat me up.
Please, I cannot fight.
Let me... let me...
Please, I don't want trouble.
Let me clarify that.
That's a lie, that's a lie.
It's people who don't want me, me to have you, they're the ones spreading that kind of rumor.
Forget it!
That girl uh... it was when she got into the school that her dad brought her to me in my house and said that, okay, this child, ehe, you have to help me take care of her and that the girl does not know anything.
So, I should be teaching her, teaching her, teaching her, teaching her.
That's why you've been always seeing us together.
So, then people started seeing us together and started thinking that uhuh, uhuh... they're dating and they're up to something.
It's a lie!
It's a serious lie.
I've said it.
Even my mom was asking me once, "Adams, uhuh... where is your girlfriend?"
I'm telling her, ah this babe has not accepted me.
Mom, it seems like I'll have to take you to school to help me woo her.
Serious!
I've told her your name.
Uh... I've heard you but another problem is that you, you're a Muslim and me, I'm a Christian.
Uhuh!
So, I cannot befriend someone who is a Muslim.
U, if you say...
So, that's another problem too.
So, what are you gonna do?
If you say that ah...
Aha, that's a serious issue, but no problem because I love you.
I love you.
What can't be solved?
Uhuh?
Look, our children, we will divide them.
Some will go to mosque, some will go to church.
That one, it's, it's, it's a peaceful thing.
That's not a problem, that's not a problem.
That's how we will settle it.
But, you're a big man now.
Isn't it true that if I marry you now, you will put me in a hijab?
No!
Aha!
No, no, no.
Aha, no, no.
I won't do that, ah...
You know I love you.
Let's forget about... let's forget about that... uhuh, let's forget about that.
Uh... the thing is that I love you, and whatever you want, that's what I'll do.
Alright, I hear you, but my mom and dad, they won't agree.
They'd kill me if they heard that's, that's the kind of person I'm dating.
Uhuh!
Mstchew.
Mstchew.
Look, what you'll do is lie to them and say I'm a Christian.
You'll lie?
Yes now.
They won't know.
I'll hide this from my family.
When we've gotten married, they can't take you away.
It's a serious thing.
You want me to lie to my mom and dad?
Not that it's a lie like that, you know.
There are some kinds of things that you will do for... to please your heart.
Okay.
You understand?
Ehe!
Okay, you say that but another problem is that I have a boyfriend.
Gaaya!
Uhuh!
I have a boyfriend.
You even said that it's been since first year that you've been wooing me.
And me, I wasn't interested, I didnt know you were serious like this.
Why now?
I have someone that I'm dating.
Why now?
Is the guy as handsome as me?
Aha, the guy is as handsome as you, much more even.
Does he have money?
Ah.
Of course.
The guy has... he has plenty of money.
But the guy...
Let me tell you a fact.
I went to see a pastor because as I'm here, I don't... I don't discriminate.
Forget it!
I'm someone who's open-minded.
If I see a Christain, if I see a Babalawo, I will talk to him.
We will talk normally.
Then the pastor told me that ah, there's a girl in my department, that heaven brought us together and that ah, they're husband and...
Then I said hey...
Ah pastor, what kind of girl are you telling me about?
He then said, "uh... the girl's name starts with uh... S."
Then I started uh...
Which S do I like in the department?
Ha!
Then he told me that uh... H comes after S.
Ah, so Sh, there's only one.
There's only one Sh we have in the department.
Uh... that one... that one is, is Shulamite.
Then I said I'd talk about it with you.
Seriously, the guy, let me tell you.
The guy doesn't love you.
Forget it!
The guy doesn't love you.
I'm the person God has tied you to.
You understand?
But the thing is that me, I myself have... God has shown me that it's that person I will marry.
Forget it!
I slept, I dreamt, I saw the guy in my dream.
See!
Both of us had our wedding.
See!
So, for that, there's no argument at all.
He's the one I'll marry.
In Yoruba... in Yoruba... in Yoruba, we say something like ala go, that dream, dream is really stupid.
So, your case, I don't understand then.
That dream you had is just an ordinary dream, it's an ordinary dream.
The one that I... that I saw is truly an inspiration.
God just gave it to that pastor, like go and tell Adams.
The pastor went and just rushed to my house like, man, this is what God told me.
That's it.
So, what you had is a dream.
Forget it!
Let's for-...
Eh?
Don't follow dreams.
Dreams, ah!
Ah!
Aha!
Okay.
Dreams can deceive you.
Okay, I've, I've heard you.
You understand?
I'll think about it.
Uh... no.
But the thing is that me, I don't like dating two people at once but since you said that a pastor has told you, no problem!
But do you know tomorrow is Valentine's Day?
Uh... tomorrow is Valentine's Day, but...
What happened then is that my uncle called me yesterday and said it seems like there is something that I want... we want to help him do in Lagos.
Ah!
Ah!
It's like I will...
Wait!
Eh?
We will celebrate Valentine's Day but it seems like I will not be around, but if I come back uh... we will celebrate Valentine's Day.
Okay!
We'll celebrate it.
It's no... it's no small thing.
No, that won't be okay.
Ah, it's tomorrow, that will be okay.
Babe, babe, love is something that you always show to people you love every day.
Okay, I hear you.
Anyways.
You, when are you coming back?
On Saturday.
Eh.
Okay.
When you come back, the thing is that if you want me to accept you, there is this phone, a new phone, like that...
I will buy it.
Don't mention the name.
Okay, you will buy it, right?
I'll buy it.
Then, the thing is that I haven't paid tuition.
There's the hostel fee too.
I don't have money now.
Babe, what now?
Is it conditional love you want to give?
No!
Aha, that's what my boyfriend does and since you said that you want... you want me to be with you...
Aha!
Man, that guy is a thief, that, that guy is a thief.
Where does he get the money?
He's not a thief.
Aha!
No.
I, I don't know.
It seems like... it seems like this love... this love, I'll take it seriously.
But you give it to me.
And you see that my hair, I need another style.
We'll go on.
Forget it.
I do two hundred naira hair too.
Ah!
Mine is more than two hundred naira.
Babe, you, you are getting too expensive for me, please.
Tuition, I haven't gotten to pay tuition either.
But babe, you know that I love you, yeah.
Do you love me too?
Let's forget about material things, yeah.
Pure love, let's show pure love first.
Other things will follow.
Okay.
Trust me!
This hair that you want to plait, plait it.
Just write it down.
This tuition that you want to pay, pay it.
I'll give it to you later.
You'll give it to me later?
Anything you want to buy, buy it.
I'll give you, I'll settle it for you now.
Okay, anyways, I'm hungry now.
Aha, you're hungry?
I'm hungry too.
Let's go buy food.
It seems like... it seems like...
Tedder hasn't opened, Tedder hasn't opened.
Me, I don't eat at Tedder.
Ah, no.
Ah!
Where do you eat then?
First time coming to school, I, I'll go to eat at Tedder then?
No.
You want me to cook?
Alright, let's go cook at my house.
Let's go to Shoprite, let's go buy something.
Shoprite, it seems like they said their manager is dead.
They then closed the Shoprite today.
I dont know, I dont know why, ah.
Let's... let's go to the cafeteria, let's go to the cafeteria.
I don't eat there, I, I'm not eating.
It's the only place that's available.
Uh... let's go to Tantis.
Tantis, mtchew, they always add too many Maggi cubes to their food.
I'll eat it like that.
Isn't it... isn't it me who wants to eat it?
No, babe.
It's not you.
Babe, you know I love you.
I love you, aha.
How could I let you eat something so bad?
No, no, no, no.
That kind of thing is not good for your body.
A pretty girl like you, look at how black you are like a charcoal, ah.
Look at your teeth, look at your eyes, aha, look at that kind of hair, aha.
Look at those sexy eyes.
What are you saying?
Let's not eat crappy food.
Okay.
So, the cafeteria?
Do you understand?
Let's go to the cafeteria.
Mstchew, I don't like the cafeteria.
Uh... even the cafeteria...
Ehm!
Don't worry, don't worry.
Let me go and then come back.
I'll carry you.
Tantis?
Uhuh, there is this place at Trans.
I heard that the, the guy, he does delicious... as in his sharwarma and pizza are really good.
Let's go there.
Sharwarma, the guy, mstchew...
Burger uh...
Let's just get ice cream, get sharwarma...
The guy's shawarma is always too salty.
Why do you always complain like this guy?
What?
Uhuh!
Tell me that you don't have money, aha.
No, no.
Uh... ah, no, no.
You too, you know.
Alright!
If you have money, get out your wallet.
Show me fifty thousand naira.
I'll know that yes, you really have money.
Look, let me tell you something,
Eh!
I am a Lagosian.
You don't carry money?
And you have...
Cashless policy!
It is...
It's good for our economy.
Show me your bank account.
Bank account?
The balance on your phone.
My balance?
Eh!
As soon as I receive it, I delete it.
Haha.
That's the situation.
You are strange.
Babe, I have money.
Okay, I have a payment system in my bag.
Ah!
Babe, I didn't come with my ATM card.
Aha, I would have shown you, seriously.
Look at how I am, I know how to take care of a lady.
Let me tell you that.
I know how to take care, ah!
People have even started saying that uh... I'm too... I'm too caring.
You should just give me a try.
You understand?
Okay, I'll try you out but one thing is that in our house, any man we get married to, he's the one who washes the clothes, he's the one who fetches water.
The wife, it's... her job is just to cook.
In the morning, you go and fetch water.
You'll wash the dishes, you'll do everything and you'll sweep the floor.
See!
I'll buy a washing machine.
I'll drill a borehole in the house.
In fact, it'll run through our bed.
Let me tell you that.
Your job is just the kitchen and that other room.
Which other room?
Aha, why marry you and say you'll just be in the kitchen.
Are you going to sleep in the kitchen?
I won't be sleeping in the kitchen.
Uhuh, we'll be sleeping in the other room.
I'll have a separate room.
No, babe.
That's how we do it at ours.
Uhuh, no problem, no problem.
Because I love you, anything, I'll do it for you.
Okay.
Okay, me, I've accepted you.
Uhuh, let's go to my house so I can cook for you.
Alright, no problem.
Let's go.
Uhuh, alright babe.
My name is Bose Alade.
I stay in the barracks.
I want to tell you my... how I spend my days.
In the barracks here, in the mornings, when I wake up, I give my kid a bath and put food on the stove.
When she's eaten, when she's taken her bath, when she's gotten dressed for school, she goes to school.
So then I do chores around the house.
And again, I do tailoring.
Because I just moved into the barracks here, so I really don’t have many customers.
So, in the...
When she's left for school, I...
If I've finished sweeping the house, done everything, all my house chores, if I've finished it all, the little... the little cloth that I have, I sew it.
Because it's every month that they... that they pay in the... that they pay the soldiers.
You know I'm a soldier's wife.
So the little cloth I have, I sew it.
When the month ends, they come and pay me.
The ones who can't pay it all pay half.
I take it.
The kind of clothes that I sew, I sew iro and buba, I sew gowns, I sew skirts, and blouses.
It depends on the styles they say they, they want.
And it depends on how much money you say that... you will pay.
So, in the barracks here, life in the barracks here is, is not so easy, but we just thank God that things will get better one day, here in the barracks.
I have a lot of neighbors!
Look at my... our house!
Our house is really long.
I have lots of neighbors.
One of them is called Piriye's Mum, another one is called Umi's Mum.
She sells pepper.
The ones down here, they sell fish.
You don’t even need to climb because we live on the top floor.
You don’t even need to climb up... and go down.
If you want to climb, you can use the bucket.
If you want to buy fish, they'll sell it to you, they'll put it in a bucket and send it up.
Inside the barracks here, we don’t...
We, the people, the wives who are in the houses here, we really don’t have jobs.
We're always in the house.
Until... when our husbands come back, that's when we get money.
After... and sometimes, when I go further inside the barracks, (they do hairdressing in the Mami Market), I go and have my hair done in the Mami Market... in the uh... Mami Market, a place where soldiers' wives sell things.
I go and get my hair done in the Mami Market.
And when the month... uh... when the month ends, if we want to go... if we want to go and collect mo-... if we want to go and buy food for the house, we go to this place, we go to Bodija, a market over there.
We go there, we go to buy things, for the house.
We go to buy things, we go to buy food in... from the market.
We...
We go through the bush.
There's a shortcut.
We cut through the bush.
If you don’t want to go through (because the transport fare to go out from... from here to Bodija, I spend seventy naira leave the barracks) you will spend another seventy naira, or fifty naira to get to Bodija.
So it d-... it's easy for us.
We just cut through the bush here.
We just cross the express way, we just spend thirty naira.
And we are in Bodija.
So that's how we are.
We're...
We always have electricity too.
We always have electricity here in the barracks as well.
If... except these last few days now when the rain... when the wind was very strong, so our electricity got messed up.
We don’t have electricity at the moment.
So we always have electricity.
And we don’t have any water in these barracks at all.
The lack of water is a problem for us.
The only time we have full water supply is in the rainy season.
When the rain falls, everyone puts their drums outside, but if it doesn't rain, we don’t... we always face water shortages.
Our tank, they made tanks for us here because it's g-... uh... group by group.
There's MP, there's Sergeant uh... S, and T, there's the Medical.
They have their borehole, but here, ours, our new... our commandant, he refused to have it repaired for us.
He ruined it.
And we go fetch water from the other block.
But they refuse.
They say they don’t want us to fetch water from our... from their place.
We should go to our place.
So since then, we've been suffering from, from a lack of water.
We look and look for water, but we don't find any.
We're always suffering water shortages.
And again, their lifestyles in the barracks here, it, it's is just easy.
Let's not talk.
It's...
B-... but I prefer the time when I was still there in Ondo State.
Over there, everything is okay.
There's water, there's everything, there are marketplaces.
But when they said that a person, by all means, will go to her husband's house, will go to her husband's house, that you need to stay with your husband because a soldier should not be left like that, the person comes here.
But that place, I still prefer that place.
Let me stay in that place.
But as life is going on now...!
I'm going to a Redeem Church.
My church here is past this Ojurin side there, inside the barracks here.
Redeem is where I'm going.
I go there.
We're...
On Monday, I go to...
On Sunday, they start the programme at nine o'clock.
They finish at twelve.
Because of uh... maybe all the people who are at work, so they can attend the programme, they start at nine o'clock.
And there's Bible Study, there's Digging Deep.
We go to...
Sometimes, once a month, they always have the night vigil sessions.
They attend night vigil programs because they don’t want too much noise in the barracks.
So that's why their program is like that.
Having another child, that's the only challenge I have.
But all the children around me, they are still my children.
My people, I welcome you all to this Sunday service.
As it is, you all know that we are already in the season of Lent.
And the season of Lent, as discussed on Ash Wednesday, is the season of preparation for the glorious passion of our Lord.
On Ash Wednesday, we told you that this period is the time of fasting, it's the time of alms-giving, it's the time of prayer.
Those are the three pillars of Lent.
And as we did to you on Ash Wednesday, you all received ashes on your foreheads.
The ashes are to show you that you are mourning for sin.
It doesn't mean that you put the ashes on your forehead to start fighting.
And that's why Prophet Joel told us that we should rend our hearts, not our garments.
And if we take a good look at today's reading, you will realize that the temptations will be much greater than usual in this time of Lent.
If you take a look at Jesus, He went into the desert.
He fasted for forty days and forty nights.
Thereafter, He faced temptations.
That is to show us what Hebrews four fifteen told us.
Jesus was tempted like us.
But in His own case, He did not sin.
Because it's not true that it is bad to be tempted.
All of us will face temptations.
The bad part is when you fall into the temptation.
And God has a way of giving us grace.
God gives us power to overcome our temptations.
But it depends on us, whether we want to use the power or we don't want to use the power.
But the power is available.
Because God will not expose us to temptations which are above our capacity.
He exposes us to temptations which we will have the capacity to overcome.
If we take a good look at Jesus, Satan tempted him in three areas.
He tempted Him with pleasure, he tempted him with power, he tempted him with money.
Who doesn't like pleasure?
Everybody likes pleasure.
It you look at uh... Eve...
When Satan tempted her, Satan told her that if you pick the fruit, that the fruit will be sweet.
He said that Eve will become like God.
She will be able to know what is good, she will be able to know what is evil.
Who doesn't want to be like God?
Eve looked at the fruit, like this.
As she looked at it, she said... she said "it's good."
She noticed that the thing is pleasurable.
She ate it.
That's hunger now, it's an issue of hunger.
The same Satan came to Jesus.
He said, "you have been fasting for days, you need to turn stone into bread now, so that you can eat."
Who doesn't want to eat?
But Jesus told him.
He said, "get thee behind me, Satan."
Is that not so?
Part of the temptations you face is an issue of hunger.
You are hungry.
You can do anything to get food.
But Jesus said you should not do just about anything to get food.
He said you will be able to tell Satan "get thee behind me, God is more powerful than you are."
Now, let's go to the issue of power.
Who doesn't like power?
Everybody likes power.
The husband wants to have power over the wife, the wife wants to have power over the husband.
Is that not what we hear on the news these days?
People kill for power, people do so many things for power.
Did a woman not stab her husband the other day?
She said that the husband was not good enough.
Everybody wants power now.
And Satan knows that Jesus, as a human being, wanted power.
He told him.
He said, "climb the mountain, jump down."
"You will be able to show everyone that you are powerful if you can jump down from that high mountain."
But Jesus told him the same thing.
He said, "get thee behind me, Satan. You shall not tempt the Lord, your God."
So you also have power to tell Satan that he should get behind you.
If the whole issue of... let's say power, comes up, you want to be powerful.
You want to show that you are in charge.
Nobody is totally in charge.
Only God is in total control.
So the best thing is to calm down.
Let everybody humble him.
Let everyone calm down totally.
If you calm down totally, and you are humble, God will give you the power you need.
And then, we move to the third one, money issues.
Everyone wants money these days, everybody does anything for money.
Children kill mothers, mothers kill their children.
All because they want money.
Everybody wants money.
But even Satan tempted Jesus over money issues.
He showed Him all the glory.
He showed Him all the wealth.
He said all this was available.
Better things are available if you'll just bow... just bow to me.
Once you bow to me, you will take possession of all the money.
What do we all bow to nowadays?
We bow to different people.
We bow to people who lie to us, we bow to traditionalists, we bow to different people, all because we want money.
But Jesus is telling us.
He said you don't need to bow to people, bow to God alone!
God will provide what you need.
That's what Jesus wants us to do.
So we all need to learn that nobody is free from temptation.
And the fact is that it is not a sin to be tempted by the Devil!
It's not a sin at all because the Devil tempted Jesus.
The only instance where it is considered sin is when you fall into the temptation.
So do not worry.
Go on facing temptation.
In fact, you will face many more during this period.
Because this period is a very serious one.
It's a time to deprive yourself of so many things.
A time to say, this thing... I will not do it again.
All the bad things I did before, I do them no more.
Because Jesus came to change us.
And another good thing about this period is that it is a season of mercy.
God forgives all our sins.
No sin is too big for Him to forgive.
That's why He said (in what Paul said in First Corinthians) "where sin abounds, grace abounds even more."
Where there is sin grace is abundant, even all the more.
So there's no sin that God cannot forgive.
The important thing is that you tell Him the sin.
Tell Him your sins and let me tell Him my sins.
If you hide your sins, there's nothing Jesus cannot see.
So if you tell Him your sins, He will forgive you.
He will blot it all out.
You know, if you look at it very well, a man, uh... Mahatma Ghandi, said it.
He said one day, he stole his father's bracelets.
Immediately after he stole them, the father started looking for the bracelets.
As his father was looking for them, he didn't know what to tell the father.
Then he... one day, he wrote it on a piece of paper.
He told the father "I stole your bracelet."
If you were the father, and your child showed you that kind of thing after you'd gone through the trouble of searching for it, what will you do to him?
You will want to slap him.
But as the father received the paper, he read it and he smiled.
He just laughed at Mahatma Ghandi.
Mahatma Ghandi was shocked and said "a'ah, why is father laughing at me?"
The father tore up the paper, then he hugged the boy and he said to him, "I have forgiven you, don't worry".
From that day uh... Mahatma Ghandi loved his father deeply because he wasn't expecting what the father did.
Jesus does the same thing for all of us.
All we need to do is to tell Him all our sins.
He will tear everything off.
And He will love us more, and we will even be worthy of hugging Him so tight because He is God.
He is not a man.
It's a man who may not forgive.
Man may not forgive.
That's why they say, "to err is human, to forgive is divine."
Man may not forgive at all but God forgives all sins.
What we need to do is to tell Him.
So this season is the best time, the best time for all of us.
Let's come back to Jesus.
If we have sinned before now, let's not sin again.
That's why we are in the season of Lent.
And that's the main reason we told ourselves on that Ash Wednesday "remember that you are dust, and to dust you shall return."
It's dust we are made of.
The basic difference between us and those things fine artists do is that God breathed life into us, but those things... nobody can put life into them.
But God loves us so much.
When He finished forming us, He brought life into us.
And we are going back to that same dust.
So that's it for today.
That's how it is today.
Let us all do well.
Let's journey through this season beautifully and we will discover that the mercy of God will be upon us.
And His life will remove every darkness which is upon us because we all have one form of darkness or the other.
So I appreciate you all for coming because if you don't show up, what will we do?
The church will just be empty.
So as you all came here and as we are offering this eucharistic sacrifice, we pray that God will accept our sacrifice.
We pray that God will have mercy on us, forgive us, and He should remove all our sins through Christ, our Lord, amen.
Well, the very first story I have for today is the one I'm talking about.
What is it?
It's here, it's in the open!
They told you it was on the way, right?
You thought they were lying again?
But this one's not a lie.
Baba has come, Daddy has arrived, Father hurry up... hurray.
They said President Muhammadu Buhari, Yusuf's father, Sara's father, Alimo's father, Aisha's husband, he has resumed work today.
That's why the Nigeria Labor Congress, another outspoken group... they have started setting targets for the President on what he's supposed to focus on.
They said (apart from the NLC [Nigeria Labor Congress], the organisations and people who are speaking on different interviews in the Punch, including the Northern Elders Council, the Pan Yoruba Sociopolitical Group, Afenifere and Doctor Junaidu Muhammed), they advised the President to focus on the economy.
So all the mishap befalling the people, all the poverty choking them up like a bow tie (which means they cannot travel abroad for medical treatment), they will be able to improve it.
The President arrived Nigeria on Friday after he spent forty nine days on a long, undisturbed medical vacation in Lagos... in London, sorry.
They said while he was addressing members of the Federal Executive Council, following his arrival, Buhari was saying that he would rest throughout the week, and he would resume work today.
The NLC has called on Pa Buhari.
He should focus on the challenges which are facing the country, especially our economy which has turned upside down.
The General Secretary of the NLC, Doctor Pisa Osoesan, was the one saying that the Government should tackle the problem of the economy so that they will be able to bring us out of this ridiculous situation which the whites call a recession.
He was saying that it is important for the government to implement politics which... a policy which will reduce our suffering, which means the suffering which is t-... which d-... which is suffocating Nigerians.
Osoesan was even telling them to quickly, quickly...
They should go and arrange the Tripartite Committee, which is to say the "Igbimo Elenumeta" [Three Man Committee].
Which means they will be the ones to sit down and rearrange the minimum wage, the fifty six thousand they said they wanted to be earning to...
Will it ever happen?
Are you... are you God?
How do you know that the fifty six thousand won't be possible?
He was saying that they continued to delay the constitution of the Wage Committee.
He said they will not compromise again.
And the Labour Congress, what will they do?
They will be angry.
And if they're angry, the Federal Government won't like it.
Well, all of us in Lagelu, and all of us in Nigeria, that's why we say, "kaabo, se daadaa lo de, a ti reti re". [welcome, did you arrive safely? We have been expecting you.]
The President has arrived.
Tell everybody to beware of how they behave from now on.
Simply because... you said what now?
Baba, he has arrived, Daddy, he has come.
This is still Lagelu, ninety six point seven.
Not ninety six point three any longer!
Don't have it be like it's a fake you're enjoying; go on our Facebook page, Lagelu FM, ninety six point seven, go and watch it.
It is live, and direct.
Yes!
We are streaming it live.
You say you want to see my face, you want to see what I look like.
Or is it that you don't know me?
Go on our Facebook page, Lagelu FM, ninety six point seven.
Go and watch it live, and direct as I am speaking now, now, now, now, now, now, now, now.
They are showing me on Facebook.
Away from that, they said President Muhammadu Buhari... he has extended it again (the tenure of the Permanent Secretary for the Ministry of Education, Dr Jamaila Suara) for another year.
It's true.
The Minister for Education, Mr Adamu Adamu, that was how he announced it.
This will be the second time that Suara's tenure will be extended, which means what?
Her tenure was supposed to have expired in February twenty sixteen when Mama turned sixty years old.
They said she got a presidential extension.
Mama should not retire before when?
February twenty seventeen.
As that one has ended, they said that even that one, it has caused what?
It has created issues in the Federal Civil Service such that people have started asking themselves what kind of a thing this is.
Who is she?
Won't she resign? Won't she go home so she can go and rest?
They said Mama still got a second extension, according to the Minister.
I say, "a'ah what is happening?"
"Aren't we abiding by the laws any longer in this country?"
If you ask me, who will I ask?
Will you keep quiet?
This one is still on the way.
While the House of Representatives Committee on Basic Education are questioning Suara on how the Mama managed to stay in service despite the fact that she is over sixty, and that was in twenty sixteen, the committee which is chaired by a member of the APC [All Progressives Congress], Mr Zakari Muhammed said that for two weeks, they have been looking for evidence, (eri maa je mi nso) [credible proof of evidence] that it was the President who gave the approval that Mama should remain in office despite the fact that she is above the age that should be in office.
But in fairness, the Permanent Secretary, they said she refused to meet the Committee.
Laila ilahlah.
Now, what is this?
Is this confidence?
Or is this disrespect?
This is insurbordination.
They say, "aifinipeni, aifeeyanpeeyan, tii m'ara oko san Bante wo'lu." [Yoruba proverb which depicts insurbordination or disrespect].
The disrespect which makes a bushman enter where?
Enter into town with ordinary boxers.
While the Committee was waiting for the evidence of the presidential approval, the Minister wrote to the Lawmakers.
Let them say that Buhar, he is the one who has given Mama another what?
Another extension in one year.
The letter which The Punch collected from Abuja on Sunday, which was dated March seven... it has a reference number, which they mentioned.
The Minister was saying that although they said the President has approved in principle, the formal letter of approval has not been given yet to Mama by the Head of Service of the Federation, Mrs Winifred Oyo Ita.
Ladies and gentlemen, what does that tell us?
They say all animals are equal, but some animals are more equal than the others.
It is true that some people of (something like) sixty, they will not even get close to sixty years old before they chase them away.
Mama has clocked sixty one, she is going to sixty two now.
They said they should leave her again.
(This is happening) under this very government, Olorun ma wa saanu wa [God, come have mercy on us].
What's happening to us?
I don't understand.
But anyway, well, Mama is enjoying it, saying, "he who is not worthy of a favor calls it forbidden."
If you were Mama, or if Mama were your mother, would you complain?
It is serious, Nigeria!
Only God will save us.
Ladies and gentlemen, the Yoruba people have an adage which says, "to ba kowaju si o, ko o ta; to ba keyin si o, ko o ta; to ba ku iwo nikan, ko o tun ero ara re pa." [Meaning: Take charge of every situation; be in control at all times]
That means, if a situation challenges you from the front, give it your full attention and overcome it.
If the challenge is from behind, equally give it your attention and overcome it; but when you are left all alone, with the situation still lurking somewhere, ladies and gentlemen, apply wisdom!
They are talking about the whistle blowing policy... engage in gossip and make money.
But, well, before you engage in gossip in order to collect money, think about it deeply
Because here's a man, he engaged in gossip and now he's in trouble, courtesy of he himself, but they are fighting on his behalf.
The Socio-Economic Rights and Accountability Project, SERAP... they have sent an open letter to the Minister of Foreign Affairs, Geoffrey Onyeama Godfrey.
What are they saying to Godfrey?
They said they should make sure that the workers who were sacked on account of whistle blowing [gossip]... (he went to report that they were fraudulent, they were into malpractices of all sorts, they were involved in corrupt practices in the uh.. ministry)... were reinstated.
They said one Intia Thompson, is the one who was sacked through a post on the Directorate of Technical Cooperation for Africa's Notice Board.
What did Thompson do?
What did Thompson do?
Thompson gossiped?
He said they engage in fraud, tricks... fraud of two hundred and twenty nine thousand dollars in the Ministry of Foreign Affairs.
They deceived people in a letter which was dated March ten, twenty seventeen.
They are demanding that Oyama act swiftly.
He should comply with the whistle blowing policy of the government of President Muhammadu Buhari, and the international standards which say that anyone who gossips under the whistle blower... against what they call harassment [idunkokomoni - harassment] they will not do what?
They will not threaten them; they will not intimidate them.
He will just blow the whistle, and he will collect money, and he will go.
Don't they say that every profession has its hazards?
If you want to be a whistle blower, one of the hazards of your own profession is that they will harrass you, they will intimidate you, in fact they can kill you if God is not on your side.
SERAP, in a letter which was signed by the Deputy Director, Timothy Adewale, was saying how did they sack Thompson?
The Ministry will appear to say they're hiding information concerning the fraud.
They insist because the public has the right to know what is going on, how the money disappeared.
Well, SERAP has been saying that Thompson should be called back.
Or else Aijebe...
They said what?
The issue, it will take a new turn.
Lord have mercy.
Ladies and gentlement, I won't say you should not do what... you should not blow the whistle.
Blow the whistle because if you blow the whistle, you will become a millionaire, but if your whistle fails or you get caught before the people who were supposed to hear the whistle... you get caught... may God have mercy on you.
That means what?
Only you, for yourself, by yourself and your family, will get into trouble.
God have mercy on us.
Well, I have left that kind of story.
I am in the 'wonders shall never end corner', the one they call what?
Stories from the women's angle.
God have mercy on us.
What is this, what did I see?
God have mercy on me again.
There's nothing much to do about it.
It's not true that you employ a person so that they can become someone in life, but when the one you employ kills you, what do we do?
How do we handle this?
It was said that a man in a restaurant in the Awoyaya area of Ibeju Lekki in Lagos State, has been arrested by oro-... operatives of the Lagos State Command because the man robbed his Mistress, one Paulina Paul.
The suspect, a twenty two year old Stephen Otuyi... the guy is said to have joined hands with... he connived, he collaborated with one Ibrahim Muhammad, and others who happened to have stole away.
They harrassed the woman in her house which is in Olomide Idiala Street, Oria-... Oribanwuwa Phase Two in Ibeju Lekki.
We heard that Otuyi owns the restaurant.
The reporter also heard that the gang stole her phone.
They stole her jewellery and clothes among other things, which means that her money, if it's taken to the market, will be like... about uh... two million naira.
Shout.
Allah.
A whopping sum of two million naira, what did the woman do to them?
What did she do to them?
Aunty Sola Alison sang about it.
That's just to say that if there's no accomplice, if you don't have an informant in the house, it is said that the enemy coming from outside cannot succeed.
But it's actually this employee who gathered people to rob his Mistress, who pays his salary.
Shout Allah akbar.
God have mercy on us.
Father God should do what?
He should save us.
Just a twenty two year old suspect... twenty two years old, what was he looking for?
It was said that Paul started working in the restaurant sometimes in January, twenty seventeen.
And he was sacked after one week.
After he lost the job, on the last day, he asked for the payment of his salary which is about three thousand five hundred, but the woman was telling him that she didn't have cash on her, so he would have to come back.
Around ten pm on January twenty one, the guy went to threaten his Mistress in the restaurant
That if you refuse to pay my money right now, now, now, now, now, trouble looms.
That's just to say that you will regret your actions.
On January twenty two, at about two thirty am, they robbed the house, they entered Paul's house with a gun and cutlass.
It's been said that "If something enters with a gun, with bullets... Mister, lie flat".
That was how they entered with a sinister looking cutlass [ada Lam/Lam's cutlass], and they took away her property, including a Toyota Matrix car.
They said the incident has been reported to the police.
That was what led to Otuyi and Muhammed's arrest.
But they guy insists that he doesn't know anything about the case.
That he was just threatening her.
Just an empty threat.
Just talk.
Talk is cheap.
I was just saying things, I don't know anything, I don't have anything.
But you know it's possible that this guy doesn't know anything indeed.
God have mercy on us.
Ladies and gentlemen, don't talk when you are angry.
Did you hear him?
This guy's mouth got him into trouble.
He said, "I was working with the lady as a Sale's Representative, in her restaurant."
"She was paying me fifteen thousand naira per month, and two hundred naira for transportation every day."
"I only worked for a week."
"I left because the second Sale's Representative, Justina, was telling the lady that I was not treating her well."
"I just gave her some advice."
"So she could get into the habit of saving money on a daily basis if she's planning to go back to Akwa Ibom, her home."
"She reported to the lady that I was encouraging her to steal money."
What!
It's a long story but the guy has been taken away.
The Magistrate presiding over the case, Mrs O. A. Amhohia, has granted him bail at the amount of five hundred thousand naira.
Shout "Allah."
Where will the person fighting for the payment of three thousand five hundred naira get five hundred thousand naira from?
Both of us are warrantors of the same money.
Then she adjourned the case till April twenty eight, twenty seventeen.
Well, Father God will help him; He will set him free; he will be able to escape.
For what?
On the level of e pele parile, parile, on the program today, a dishonest, fraudulent, deceitful, scam expert and thief, whose name is Eze Udoh, it's been reported that he has been arrested by men of the Umuahia Central Police in Abia State because the guy withdrew the sum of one million, forty nine thousand, five hundred and forty five naira from his victim's account.
A policeman was saying what?
They have been searching for the suspect since a complaint was lodged by the victim, Mister Oka Monday, that the suspect stole his ATM card, and he collected all the money in his account.
According to the source, the victim who is from Amachara Umukpara, a satellite town close to the capital city, Umuahia, was making an attempt to withdraw some money from an ATM which is attached to the Commercial Bank in Umuahia when the suspect said he would help him because the network was bad.
We heard that when the attempt to withdraw the money failed, the suspect had already memorised the victim's secret pin, he advised him to follow him to a nearby bank where the transaction will be easier.
Eh, what?
What happened when they got there? He just... did he, he end up doing what he wanted to do?
Well, he ran away with the... he ran away with the ATM card.
I don't understand that.
Why would you give a stranger your ATM card and your pin too?
It was said that... what happened after that... he just started getting different alerts... debit alerts and the like.
All his money was collected.
God have mercy on us.
They are watching us closely.
The security operatives started searching for the suspect following the intelligence report they gathered.
And their efforts later paid off when the suspect was caught.
He pointed out that while searching the suspect's house, they found thirteen different ATM cards belonging to different victims.
The State Commissioner of Police, [hau] the overall boss [hau], Mr Adeleye Oyebade, confirmed the arrest of the suspect.
He said he has confessed to the crime.
He said he's the one stealing people's pins and their ATM cards.
Well, we thank God that he's been apprehended.
If you are listening to me and you also steal people's ATM cards, by the grace of Allah, by the grace of Jesus, you will be caught at your next attempt.
Ladies and gentlemen, that's as far as we can go today on the programme, "Naija Na Wa O", we'll come your way again tomorrow by the grace of Allah, by the grace of Jesus.
This is Lagelu, ninety six point seven.
No longer on ninety six point three.
We've done what?
We've moved to a higher ground, just to serve you better.
I will not leave the air today until I say a happy birthday to our Mommy, Mrs Kikelomo Orimolade, Mama Ilu, Mommy Ayodeji.
Talking of what?
Illusions.
I say "Happy Birthday, Mommy!"
Two hundred years is like a year to you.
Two hundred years is like a year.
Long life and prosperity!
Happy birthday to you!
Ladies and gentlement, until tomorrow when I will come your way again, I'm still your buddie, your brother and man on the radio.
A.K.A. Afuda Samuel is the full name, but you can simply call me Afuda Babba Agbalagba [Afuda the elderly one].
I sit on the ground, I am bending over, I am rolling on the ground, begging you to please take good care of yourselves, for my sake, simply because I love you all to the bone.
Bye for now.
Here's the news, which Afoda Samuel is about to read.
First, let me tell you the highlights from the news.
The Senate President has gone to inspect some power plants in Berlin.
The FRSC has caught six hundred and fifty seven people for failing to install speed limiting devices in their vehicles.
A woman has been arrested in South Africa over a baby that was kidnapped.
Sunshine Queens, they are ready for the new Nigeria Women Premier League Season which is about to start.
Now, let's tell you the news in full.
How to handle the law on... how they generate power, transmission and how they distribute it, can be the best thing which can be done to solve the current electricity problem facing the country.
In an interview with the Project Leader, Warner Fortwiter, he said that Nigeria... they will still benefit from the plan to switch to renew-... build energy... from electricity generation.
Let's listen to him.
The Senate President, Bukola Saraki, says this while on a tour with others to an energy self sufficient village located in Germany.
He said the National Assembly must rework the law which will allow communities to generate energy, and allow people to use their brain, and involve people in the private sector as well.
The Lake Chad Basin Commission, LCBC, have identified that the kinds of issues known as insurgency and climate change are the major problems facing effective groundwater management in the basin.
In Abuja, their Technical Director, Doctor Mana Bubakari, says that the situation has become complicated by the growth of people... the number of people which keeps increasing in the region due to the many people who have been forced to leave their homes.
He said there are almost nine million people whose livelihoods depend on the lake staying in the region.
Their commission is a kind of intergovernmental organization that oversees water and other natural resources, and how they are used in the basin.
The eight member government was chosen because they are close to Lake Chad.
They are Cameroon, Chad, Niger, Nigeria, Algeria, the Central African Republic, Libya and Sudan.
The Joint Admissions and Matriculation Board, JAMB, has said that they will start selling the twenty seventeen UTME (Unified Tertiary Matriculation Examination) form on March twentieth.
The Chief spokesman for JAMB, Doctor Fabian Benjamin, said this today in Abuja.
Doctor Benjamin said that the date was fixed for the twenty-fourth of January following the agreement they made on the harmonization of the examination timetable in a meeting with other examination bodies.
JAMB said recently that they will arrange an optional mock exam which anyone interested can sit for before the twenty seventeen UTME [Unified Tertiary Matriculation Examination].
According to what the board said, what they want to do with the mock exam is to allow candidates to have a feel for what the examination... what it will look like.
They said candidates can choose whether or not they want to take the mock examination.
The Federal Road Safety Corps, FRSC, in Anambra has said that they have arrested no fewer than six hundred and fifty seven motorists who have not installed the speed limiting device in their vehicles in February.
Speaking on the subject, Area Commander, Mister Sunday Ajayi, said that while one hundred and seven people were caught by a kind of mobile court, one hundred and two of them were deemed guilty and have been handed punishments.
According to him, fifty one of them were guilty of non-installation of the device while others were involved in other offences including passing through roads they were not supposed to.
They were speeding too much, which the whites call overspeeding.
They were overloading or driving recklessly.
He said we have X to drive home with road users, people who operate different kinds of cars [fleet operators].
On Nigerian roads today, you cannot drive in any way without installing the device we asked you to install.
This is still the six PM news on Lagelu, ninety-six point seven FM.
Still from this news bulletin, a woman has been arrested for the kidnapping of a baby in South Africa.
Sunshine Queens, they are ready for the New Nigeria Women Premier League Season.
We will take a short break now.
When we come back, we will read you more news.
Don't leave!
The love God has for everyone made Him send His only child so that whoever believes in Him will not perish but have everlasting life.
God did not send His Child to the world in order to condemn us, but to save us.
Today, Jesus has over one billion followers, and even more.
The story is from the Book of Luke.
I am writing you this book, Theophilus, to tell you the way everything happened so that you will know the main things, right from the birth of Jesus Christ, when Mary and Joseph went to register their names, when Caesar Augustus was the King of Rome, and Herod was the King of Judea.
Mary and Joseph were the parents of Jesus.
An angel appeared to Mary, he told her that she will give birth to a boy who will be the savior of the world, as a virgin.
Jesus started growing and he was wise.
In fact, he was sitting among professors and in fact, doctors were there too, and he was lecturing them.
As he began preaching the good news, some people started following his line of thought, saying he was speaking the truth.
Jesus overcame temptations from the devil on three occassions, when he was fasting for forty days and forty nights.
He had his baptism with John the Baptist as John the Baptist told the people "there is someone ahead of me, who is greater than me, who will baptise you with water, and fire, I cannot even take his sandals off."
As Jesus was preaching, he started coming in contact with his followers.
He was greeting them one after the other.
Peter, whom he called Simon; Andrew; James; John; Philip; Bartholomew; Thomas; Matthew; James; Thaddeus; Simon the Zealot; and Judas Iscariot who betrayed Jesus.
They started going around, spreading the good news.
They were spreading it to all the corners of the earth.
And they were preaching that God's kindgom has come, everyone should repent.
And so people started giving their lives to God, and they repented for their sins.
Then on a particular night, it was the last supper, Jesus sent his disciples to go get all they will eat and drink for the last supper.
So they left.
Go into town!
When you got there, you'll see a guy carrying a bucket of water.
Talk to him!
Go into his house.
Tell him there are thirteen of us.
Then ask, "what's a good place for us to stay?"
He'll show you a room, it's upstairs, it's very neat.
Prepare it.
That's where we'll stay.
God!
You are a very good God.
You are the King of the world.
You're the One who makes things happen, and You're the One who makes trees bear fruit.
Here is my body.
Take it, divide it.
Do this in remembrance of me.
God!
You are a good God.
I really appreciate You.
You are the King of the world.
You are the One who makes trees bear fruit.
Take it, share it.
This is my blood.
I have been waiting for this day to eat this Passover before the Son of Man suffers.
I tell you that I will not eat until you have known what this food means in the Kingdom of God, and until what God said has come to pass.
Did you hear me?
This is the covenant.
It is my body, and my blood, that I pour for you.
But I tell you, the person who will kill me, who will even betray me, is here with us as we eat on this table.
And God will deal with the person.
The greatest among you must be as a small child, and the master must be as the servant.
Who is the greatest?
The one who sits to eat or he who serves?
It's the one who sat down, right?
But I am among you as the one who is serving, you have been with me since this trouble started.
And as my Father has given me the authority, even so, I will pass it to you.
You will eat and drink at my table in the Kingdom.
And you will also sit on thrones, judging the twelve tribes of Israel.
I greet you.
How are you?
Why do doubts arise in your minds?
Take a look, see my hand, and my leg!
You should see that this is I, myself.
Not a spirit.
Touch me, and you will know!
Spirits don't have flesh, or bones as I have.
This is what I was telling you when I was still with you.
Everything Moses wrote, and the ones which the Prophets wrote both in Psalms, and in the other books, they have come to pass.
This is what was written.
The Saviour must, and then rise up from the grave after three days.
In my name, tell the people that they should repent and say God has forgiven them, starting from Jerusalem.
You are witnesses of all these thigs and I bring you the promise of God, the Father.
You must wait in this town until power from above comes upon you.
May God bless and keep you, all the power in this world and... belongs to my Father, to enable you teach those who are in the world, and baptise them in the name of the Father, His Son, and the Holy Ghost.
I am with you all, everytime, even until till the end of the world.
People of Plateau, they have one kind of... life-... lifestyle which shows in their dress, most especially their costumes.
As I have said, you know that Plateau has different ethnic... uh... different ethnic groups.
They have more than twenty three ethnic groups, on the Plateau.
So just a local government alone has more than eight... more than ten.
So, as people are different with different ethnic groups like this, you know that their style of dress will differ.
In my local government particularly, our traditional uh... dressing, we are... we are... we are... our old women used to carry children in the back with... goat skin.
You know that it's our traditional way of uh, uh... carrying a baby on our backs.
And you know people... some wear the agbada, some wear different costumes.
So we have that one here.
And then... uh... the delicacies, that means the food we eat in Plateau.
We have different varieties.
Most especially, f-... like me, I like gote.
You know gote is a kind of delicacy which they prepare.
At times, they use acha.
What do we...?
What they call hungry rice, right?
So, they use it to make that gote.
It's a light food, very soft food.
When you have it, you enjoy it.
It makes you shine.
So they use um... spinach to do it with uh... uh... acha.
They use uh... they use tomatoes, and some spices to, you know, garnish it.
Uh... actually, we have uh... different types of dance, or dances (so to speak) on the Plateau.
And uh... there is...
Like in my place in Mangu Local Government, they use horns.
Some even use guinea corn, eh... um... the (what do they call it?), the stalks.
They blow it like uh... just like the horn too, animal horn.
So, they call that one uh... Kwarak.
Some call it uh... Nari.
So we have different, different uh... types of dance.
And uh... as the tradition is...
And then, about the festivals of Plateau State, we have all sorts of festivals also, uh... depending on uh... the zones.
Like the one in Pankshin, they have a festival they organize yearly.
They call it uh... pus... mus... uh... pus... mus... something like that.
I can't...
Mtschew I've... I've forgotten, but I know there's a festival they organize like that.
In my place, we have it.
We call it Pus Cat.
In Plateau here, the Berom organize it.
They call it Zem Berom.
And so many others like that.
Here in Plateau State.
So, uh... the languages, we have so many languages here on the Plateau.
Uh... we have the br-... the major languages which uh... they speak in Plateau.
We have Berom, Tarok, Mwaghavul, Mopun, uh... Jarawa, the... you know, uh... Goemai, and so many of them.
So uh... actually, it's a place... it's a place...
Plateau is a place which uh... has different languages that people speak.
Alright.
Hm.
The thing that I want to talk about, right, is clothes.
Hm.
Of our girls nowadays, right?
This... uh... our girls, the way they wear their clothes, it embarrasses me so much.
They can't dress properly.
They can't dress properly.
This isn't wearing clothes; it's dressing like a hooker.
Alright.
That's not how we used to dress.
I thought it was just me who was seeing it.
The whole body exposed.
Uhuh!
Even the legs, not that they have a nice shape.
Ehe!
They don't consider whether or not it will fit them.
They don't consider it.
It'll fit me or not.
Ehe, they will just wear anything.
This one time, I saw a lady.
The lady was big.
Her thighs were really fat.
Haha, like yams.
Yes!
She then wore a very s-... sh-... short skirt.
Then at the back, she tore it.
As she was walking, you could see her underwear.
No sense of dress.
That day, I felt really ashamed.
I said, "what's this we're doing?"
She's done for.
Please, let us mothers give guidance to our daughters.
People have seen everything.
Alright!
As they're leaving the house, let's talk to them so they will wear clothes like we used to before now.
I hope that it's from the house they dressed that way.
You know some of them have some sense.
Alright!
Sometimes, they carry it on their backs.
Ehe!
As soon as they get somewhere or their friend's place, they will change.
Eh!
That's what they used to do, some of them.
Okay!
So, even the parents, they won't know.
So, it may be that the parents don't even know.
Jesus!
But mine, if we see it... if I see it, I will talk.
Hm.
Whether you are my daughter, or not, I will call you.
Hm.
Hm.
I will say, "this way you're dressing, is it an advertisement?"
Hm.
It's not good.
Hm.
Two!
You're showing off what's supposed to be for your husband!
Yes!
Everyone's seen it!
Yes!
So what he'll have is second-hand.
Yes!
Even i-... if he admires it now in the house, no, he will go out again.
Hm.
No respect again; no respect again.
That's it.
Ehn!
So me, I talk to them.
If they like it, let them hear; if they don't like it, it's their own problem.
I've told them.
The thing that's, that's disturbing me is that when you tell them, they will say that you, you are old fashioned.
Eh!
That because your own time, is not uh... th-... their own time.
The world has changed now.
The things that we were using before, is not what they are using.
So, let's just, just leave them alone.
We used to use uh... wear mini skirts.
That it is...
Eh.
But our mini skirts were very comfortable.
Yes!
Just above the knee a bit like this.
Hm.
It wo-... won't be up, up like this.
And we didn't tear them.
And we didn't slit it like this so you can see the underwear.
Hm.
Some of them don't wear underwear.
If they sit down and open their legs, you'll see the thing.
Theirs was for... is for attraction; ours was not.
It was the fashion.
Yes!
And very sensible fashion.
Not this kind that they are doing.
And if they see men, they'll go shaking their butts.
Uhuh!
As if they are advertising themselves to the men.
This one, b-... the Bible does not change.
It's been the same thing for a long time.
That's how the bible is.
If you do not dress sensibly, it said that our body is the temple of God.
And you see men, right?
If you make it useless, it's your business.
You see men, right?
As they are, right?
If they see you and you are advertising yourself, that's how they will come.
Uhuh!
Then if you give it to them... then if you give it to them, they'll go and tell their friends that that one, as you look at her walking like this and advertising, I, I've already gone and had mine.
Isn't it just like f-... flies on shit?
You should go.
You should g-...
That's it.
And th-... th-... they won't marry you.
It's their work, that's that.
They won't marry you.
How could they marry you?
They'll go and look for an innocent girl.
That's the one they'll take as their wife.
When you've become a second hand girl, when you've become a second hand girl.
That's the thing that's bothering me.
Everybody has seen.
Ehe!
Everybody has.
No respect again.
Then it's me that'll take her home?
Yes!
No.
Alright.
It's not enough.
Uhuh!
So, that's what's bothering us.
And this one for boys now, that it's... or it's ass down... or what is it?
Hm.
Ehe.
It's crazy people who dress like that.
My sister!
But now, it's our children.
Yes!
They will leave this thing; come down like this.
Eh!
Some o-... of the underwear isn't even clean.
Oho!
As dirty as can be.
Really dirty!
It even smells.
And then, they will be leaving it.
I always tell them uh...
Yes!
If they say there is a war now, how will they run?
Oho!
Will you be able to run?
You can't run because the pants are holding your legs.
Eh!
They can't take steps very well.
So and then, this hair.
This... the thing that bothers me about boys' pants, when they wear the pants, they'll go take their hands to hold their private part in their hands and be walking like this.
Ah, it's God that'll help us.
Uh... because, if... like they're gonna fall...
Aha!
I said, "what is th-..."
Ehe!
They want to hold them so they won't fall off.
So they won't fall off, right?
So, that's how their hands will be.
So... but it's not good.
Haha, well!
It's not good.
It's a problem; it's a problem you are causing yourself.
So, let's be talking.
Aya!
Because if you dress well, people will see you and admire you.
They will admire you.
If you dress that way, I won't know if it's a crazy person or not.
Hm.
Hm!
That's right!
Ehe!
So we have our problems, us parents.
We have problems, serious problems.
It'll get better.
Yes!
Okay, if you want to make gote, uh... after you buy ingredients from your market, as you come back, and get home, uh... the first thing I do, I put the leaves in water, then add salt.
Why should I put salt?
I add salt to kill the germs that have infested the leaves because, on the fire, I won't leave it for long.
It's just... about five minutes.
So as I put it in the water with some salt (because vinegar, I won't be able to get that all the time), then, I will take my bones (marrow bones, that's what we normally use because they will make it tasty), put them on the fire, add onions and then tomatos.
If I want, sometimes, I make it without tomatos.
While it's boiling there, I will come and sit down, cut my garden eggs (yalo), tiny ones, to give it that bitter taste.
As I... as I cut them, I will come and add them on top of the bones, as it is boiling on the fire.
Then, I will cut my leaves.
As I am cutting them (you know some of them have to stay a bit longer on the fire while some are for five minutes), I will bring it down.
Now uh... the yakuwa [red sorrel], I will put it on for... let's say ten minutes.
So as the fi-... fi-... bones are boiling, I will come and add the yakuwa [sorrel].
That means I have added my garden egg, right?
Then, it is boiling, boiling.
I don’t like the one with uh... groundnut... adding groundnuts, but some people do add it, or beans.
But mine, it's plain, I take it without groundnut.
Then, I will cut the leaves, everything, keep it on the side, carry my acha.
The acha [hungry rice], I will use a little.
Not a lot.
Just like uh... a tin... uhuh... for four people.
Just this small tin, I will get some.
Because it has stones, I have to wash it well, using a calabash.
We use a calabash.
Add water, two, shaking it till it's clean, pour it until when... twice or three times, like this.
You will see the stones, they will go down.
It's only the acha, that will go to the other uh... dish.
Then you will pour it, do it again for about two or three times.
You should make sure that all the sand has come off.
If you finish that, then you will pour it.
Then you'll stir it.
You haven't added the leaves yet.
You will be stirring it.
When it gets thick, then, you will take the spinach, and the other leaves which you have cut and kept aside, and add them.
And then, you will stir it, cover it and leave it for... let's say five minutes, like this.
It will be ready.
Don't keep it on the fire for too long because if it stays for too long, even the leaves, they will change color, uhuh... and maybe the nutritional value will get destroyed.
So, you have to leave it like that.
Bring it down.
It is now ready.
You can eat it.
And this gote, we like it so much because it is very nutritional.
All these things... ingredients you are adding, they have vitamins, minerals, and other things.
So, that is what we make.
Once... for lunch, we do have it.
Bones, the meat, it's proteineous.
The acha's got protein too, right?
Uh... in the leaves, there's minerals, vitamins and other things.
So, I don’t... we don’t... I do not add oil.
No oil.
It's plain.
Don’t add oil.
Most people don’t like it with oil.
That is how we eat it.
Uh... so, that is how we cook it.
Then, you will eat it.
When you finish eating it, if you want to drink something, you can take kunu or gruel, the local kunu that we drink.
Drinking it will help with digestion.
And this one... this uh... gote, right, is very good, not only for a medicinal pur-... diabetes.
People that have diabetes, you know, you will not be able to eat rice.
You will not be able to ea-... eat uh... corn, but acha is good.
So it is recommended for them.
And when you are sick, and you're recovering, it is another recommended food for convalescence.
That's what we give people because if you have no appetite, it'll give you an appetite.
Even for small children, it is very good for every...
The... this word... gote, right, is the best for pregnant women because it strengthens the blood.
The leaves, they strengthen the blood.
Even if you go to this uh... kind of normal maternity, they do tell us that we should eat plenty of leaves, so this thing of ours, our blood, will be strong.
So, it is not only for the rich people as... even if you are as poor as anything, you can cook this gote.
Very little money, very little money.
If you have two hundred naira, or five hundred naira, you can cook gote for the household.
Buy these leaves o-... one hundred naira, two, two hundred; the garden eggs, fifty naira; hip-... spinach, fifty naira; the other leaves.
That is all.
And the acha, a little.
That is all.
So it's very affordable.
You can afford it.
It's not expensive.
So everybody can make this and have a good meal, a balanced diet, that at least won't hurt your wallet.
Hello, my people!
It's me, Chibozor Chilaka.
We're in Jettan right now.
But I don’t have much to say, but I will go ahead and say that life is not easy.
You're supposed to know what's happening now in this country.
So many things are happening, but we will still thank God for life.
No matter how hard life is, we should remember we have God.
Because when we have God on our side, everything will keep moving forward, even though if you try to serve God, temptation will still be coming your way as the young man that you are, or the young woman that you are.
But what... you will still know that no matter how you try to do it, problems will still come your way.
But that does not mean you should give up.
And even, even though you are trying to serve God as the young man, or young woman that you are, people will still be telling you "what are you doing?"
Are you sure of what you are doing?
But's leave that aside for a moment.
Let's keep talking about what is happening.
Anything happening now in this life, right, you should first put... you must first involve God.
And, if you don’t in-... involve God, by God, you are wasting your time.
So whatever you are trying to do, you should... you should... you should try as a young person to be building things up.
You know, let's try to be building our... to build our life up.
Try to do things which we're supposed to do and we should remember that even in the uh... the Bible in, in Proverbs, it tells you that you should try to remember your Creator when you are young.
Because if you don’t serve God now, you don’t know when you will serve him next.
Will it be when you've grown old?
Because even though, if you remember well in the Bible, Cain and Abel... Cain... you're supposed to know how Cain, and Abel's case ended.
Because Cain, he, he was a farmer, he gave God something that’s not good while Abel, he gave God something good.
So, if Cain, and Abel could know what they were supposed to give to God, (one gave God something good and the other one did not give God something good), so now those of us who are youths, is it when we're old that we want to serve God?
But that does not mean... that does not mean that we will not live our lives as youth, but if we are living our lives as youth, we should still remember that there is God.
He is in charge of everything we are doing.
And anything we are doing now, in the future, we will still pay for it.
Whatever we eat now, whatever we drink now that enters our body, in the future, we will still pay for it.
Whether we drink, we smoke... we will still pay for it in the future.
So anything we are doing now in our days of youth, we should remember that life is still ahead of us.
You don’t know what is ahead.
And to cut it short, let me talk about... let me talk about Nigeria's problems.
So many things have been happening now because our government, they are really not doing what they're supposed to do for us.
We all know that there are problems left and right.
We're talking about Boko Haram, we're talking about the IPO, we're talking about Oduduwa.
So many things are out there now which even our government doesn’t want to come out to tell us the truth about.
It's been a long time since they told us that we are the leaders of tomorrow.
But when are we going to become the leaders of tomorrow?
Is it when we're old?
Now, if we look at it very closely, we don’t have any youths today who are coming out to say that they want to run for anything.
Most of all, you will see us on social media.
We are always playing with some phone, we are taking selfies, we are doing all kinds of things.
Yes, that is good for those of us who are youths.
Hey, I'm not saying that social media is bad.
It's good for us.
But, we s-... try our best, try to build ourselves up to become youths because if (like me) talk has never come out that I want to ru-... run for gover-... governorship now, you will tell me that I am a young man.
That I haven't reached that age.
If you don’t vote for me, who else do you want to vote for?
The same leaders that are giving us the, the same recycling thing that are happening.
They will bring another man today.
That man, if he doesn’t rule, he will put forward his own child.
His own child will put forward his own child.
You and I would still be getting the same thing which we are getting.
They never im-... improve our lives in any way.
So as youths let's try to build ourselves up.
Let's try and believe in ourselves, and let's try to support one another.
Let's not look down on anyone who decides tomorrow that he wants to work for the betterment of this country.
And mstchew another thing is that we, as youths, we need to be building ourselves up.
Schools are only... where we are going can't make us become better people because these schools are garbage in, garbage out.
This country for a long... how many years since we... they gave birth to us up until now?
Nothing is changing.
Instead, things have gone from bad to worse.
Even our parents tell us that when they were much younger, things (back in their day) were better.
Now (we are here now), things are still not better for us.
Is this good?
It's not good at all.
If you go to other countries, they are progressing.
They are doing research all the time.
Things are always progressing for them day by day.
They always try to do things which will be better for them in the future.
Even some people, in their countries, they are mostly using schools... people who are educated.
Though maybe one department can decide to do some research.
The research that student did, that is what will help the country.
Before you know it, they have developed.
Before you know it, other people will come around, to, to buy things for the, the same school!
It's from that school that they bring about development.
But here in Nigeria, nothing like that is happening.
If you and I do research, we will go to a computer... or we will go to a cyber café, or we will go to our school lab to collect what someone else has done.
To do the same old things which someone else has done.
We will still be doing the same thing.
So tell me how we want to progress today.
We will not be able to grow if this continues like this.
So we need to hold our leaders accountable for everything they are doing for us.
Because if we don’t hold them accountable, this country will not move forward.
And the problem with us is that we, we are afraid.
If a man comes out today to say he wants to re-... do... he wants to start a revolution, this one will run out saying he is not involved.
If you go to other countries, developed countries, they don’t hesitate the way we do, they only do what helps them develop.
They put religion aside, put (uh... what do they call it), ethnicity aside.
They just embrace one thing which is unity.
And that unity, is what... brought about that development for that country.
My name is Joy, Joy Jatto.
I work in this school where we are now.
I live in Bukuru.
I'm a native of Plateau State.
I live in Bukuru with my parents.
Uh... this Jos, as you see it, is a very beautiful state.
The weather, we don’t have any problem here.
We have good weather.
The heat does not bother us at all.
So, the people in Jos are very peaceful people, very friendly people.
They don’t look for trouble at all.
Uh... in my university, I studied French.
So, I... then I got a job here.
I work here.
Uh... we have plenty of the tourist sites in Jos.
We have the zoo, the wildlife park, the museum.
All those places, they are very beautiful.
We can go to the zoo, go and see animals.
Animals which have been there for a long time.
The elephant, it's even over a hundred years old.
It's still there.
We have snakes.
All those animals which you'd never expect, they are...
They are in the zoo.
And then in the museum, you will see a lot of pieces of art that are very beautiful.
You will like them.
It's fine.
You can go there, go and buy things, take them home.
Because in Jos, we have a lot of things.
We also have uh... different cultures.
For instance me, I am a Berom girl.
We are...
Our cultural food is gote.
This gote, they make it with acha.
Even people who have diabetes... gote cures diabetes.
It treats very many illnesses.
People come from outside, just to come and see what we are using acha for.
We even use it to make pudding.
We can make acha pudding.
Add your milk to it, and sugar.
It will help you, and you will like it.
It's food for diabetic patients.
And if you don’t want have uh... a big uh... belly like this (people who have a very big belly) if you are eating acha, it will help the belly, make it go flat.
Acha is a very nutritious food.
You make it with plenty of vegetables.
All those greens... you can buy them in the market.
And this Jos, we don’t have any problem, as I told you.
Our market... our things are very cheap.
If you go buy things in Katako market, if you want to buy cloth, the cloth is really, really cheap.
You shouldn't go to a uh... shop or a supermarket.
Go to Katako, buy your jeans, buy your shirt.
Really, really cheap.
Buy your sweater.
As you can see, this town, it is very cold, you should go to Katako to buy your sweater.
Very affordable.
Even brands.
You will see them there.
It’s a second-hand market.
You'll see a lot of nice things you'll want.
And you can buy them for cheap.
We have different cultures in Jos.
Berom, Ngas... you know.
Ah, another food that Jos people like to eat, is dog.
That meat... they like eating dog meat in this town.
Jos people really like dog.
Ngas people, Berom people (my own tribe), we like eating dog.
But me, I don't eat it with them, but dog is considered meat where I'm from.
It’s a delicacy.
We also have uh... (among the tribes which are in this place), we have the Mangu, we have uh... the Ankwai.
Ankwai people, they drink burkutu a lot.
They are the ones who make burkutu.
Burkutu is a kind of local beer that they make.
Oh, Ankwai people drink it a lot.
Burkutu is very cheap here in Jos.
It's a drink that if you drink it, and you don’t eat, it can make you fall down.
But it's more the Ankwai people who drink it.
Other tribes drink it too, but it's a local drink that Ankwai people are making, and it is very affordable.
We have kunu, which we make, which is very medicinal as well.
That one is not alcoholic, it's not beer.
Everybody can have that one.
It doesn’t need sugar, it doesn’t need anything.
They use kunu, and there are different types of kunu.
There's one for which we use, (uh... this thing), to do it, tiger nuts.
We call it aya in Hausa.
That kunu is very nice.
You don't even put sugar in it.
You will use aya, you will use dabino to make the kunu.
And it really helps people.
If you drink it, you won’t want to have, have sugar again.
Because that kunu, it is very very rich.
Uh... we make soup.
As soup, we have <hau> miyan kuka <hau>
That kuka is very tasty.
We cook it with plenty of mil-... meat like that, which will make the soup tasty.
Kuka.
We have <hau> miyan taushe <hau> which they make with um...
They use potash to make that soup too.
It makes the soup tasty.
Uh... there is masa.
Jos people make a lot of masa.
Our own masa, we can make it with rice, we can make it with corn.
It depends on what you want to use it for.
Which one?
You will just pick.
If it's the corn kind, you will make it.
It is tasty.
If it's the rice kind, you will make it.
People are buying it.
It is really nice.
Early in the morning in Jos, you will see people in joints eating masa like how, in other places, maybe they would be eating ewa [beans], or something else, like that.
But in Jos, it's masa.
We have masa joints where people will just gather to buy, waiting in line, buying masa to eat.
Even if you're in the office, some people buy it and take it to the office.
Some will, from the office, send their boys, or go there themselves to buy masa, and kunu.
You will see them together.
You will buy drinks.
Kunu, there's one which they make with rice, as I told you, there are different kinds of kunu.
There's that one they make with tiger nuts, the one which they make with rice.
So, if you don’t buy akara (which is the usual thing), you can buy and take masa and kunu.
Eh myself, well my father, he is a policeman.
I'm a policeman's daughter.
So work... I came to this school.
My parents are...
My father is a policeman.
My mother, she is a businesswoman.
Even myself, I go into small scale businesses.
I'm not just into teaching.
I am also into business, selling shoes and bags.
Sometimes, I travel to Lagos to buy them and bring them here.
You know that things in Lagos are also nice.
I go there to bring the goods to Jos, and then sell to my people.
But if it's okirika [used] things, it looks like we have the best here in Jos because things are very cheap, your clothing... anything you want to buy.
Children's clothes are also available, the used ones, you'll get them almost new.
A lot of people go there to buy it.
There are lots of fruit in this state.
You've noticed.
We have fruit.
We buy them really cheap.
It's not expensive at all, never.
Watermelons, oranges, bananas which... they are very cheap.
So people don't get sick in Jos anyways because our weather is good, our food is good, and it's not expensive.
Anybody can come to this...
You can... you can come to Jos to buy the fruit.
You will enjoy it.
And accomodation isn't costly in this town, at all.
Vistors... strangers can come anytime.
They don't pay much in rent.
And the people of Jos... even if you don't know anyone and you are new in this town, you'll meet people who won't make fun of you.
They would want to help you, show you the way, show you a place you can stay.
They would even tell you areas where accomodation is expensive and where it is cheap.
That's who Jos people are.
They are very peaceful.
They don't look for trouble!
They don't like to fight, or anything.
As you see, whether you are a Christian or a Muslim, we all live together.
We don't like trouble at all.
So Jos is a very beautiful state.
I like this state.
I like to stay in Jos.
Even if I go to Lagos, the heat over there makes it uncomfortable for me to stay long because I'm already so used to this town.
This weather here is so beautiful.
And we don't like to leave it anyways because this is home.
It's just like we're in America.
It's not...
People say that if a guy from Jos goes to America, he won't have problems adapting because the weather also gets so cold here like...
I haven't been to America yet but the cold here is like what they describe in America.
So if someone leaves Jos for America, they can stay there because you're already used to the weather.
Hm... about our hair, you know we have lots of hairstyles which we like to plait here in Jos.
We have exotic hairstyles.
We plait our hair to the front, and to the back.
They will pack it like this, it's beautiful and really cheap.
You'll see, our girls like it.
We don't really wear weave here.
It's mainly plaiting.
People wear weave, but no-... not much.
Here, we plait our hair, mainly.
Because plaiting here isn't expensive at all.
And the people of Jos are experts in the hairdressing business.
In fact, before you go, I can show you where you can get your hair done.
You'll like it.
It's really cheap, really affordable and it will last longer on you.
We do our hair now and leave it on for a month.
You'll still see it.
It'll still look neat.
Becaust they'll plait it very well.
But in Jos, dressing hair... (just because hairdressing is the main business of the women here), you can't just call up your hairdresser and say you want to get your hair done.
You'll need to book ahead of time because there's always a lot of people there.
There are many, many girls who dress hair in this place, but first you, you will book a space because the wait is mostly long.
Do you see why I like Jos?
Because life here is easy.
No problems, no hustle and bustle like in Lagos, no heat, nothing.
Even when it rains, you'll just notice that our weather is nice.
You don't have any problems.
Wo-... reach... uh... rashes won't appear on your body because the weather isn't hot.
The weather is good here.
I can't compare it with Lagos because there's too much heat over there!
You'll see rashes, you'll see people's skin being affected with all kinds of things, but here, the weather is good on us.
We don't worry about rashes, or anything.
With the way the weather is, we don't really put on makeup.
And if you insist on putting on makeup, it wont get messed up.
You know that if the weather is too hot, it it messes up makeup, but here, people who wear makeup wear it for longer because the weather is cold.
It's nice and it doesn't affect makeup.
So myself, I love this Jos of mine a lot.
Plateau State is the home of peace, and tourism, a beautiful place to be.
And I'm sure that before you leave, even if you go back home right now, you will feel like you've left a better place.
Because the weather... I know that you are feeling cold, but you are starting to get used to it by now.
Because we have good weather here.
There are no problems with it.
The people are very peaceful, very accommodating.
They will listen to you when you speak; if you need anything, even if you've lost your way, you will come across lots of people who will guide you.
Nobody wants to get money out of you.
Nobody!
We don't have pickpocketing in Jos.
It's hard.
They don't do that here at all.
They don't snatch people's bags in Jos anyhow.
Hm'm!
People are plenty happy with the little they have.
They're a very peaceful people, and very accommodating.
We are not that troublesome.
That's what I want to tell you about Jos.
Thank you very much!
Most people talk about why men watch football.
In the first place, if you see a man watching football, most of the time...
Typically, anyway, some women watch football.
But you will see... maybe it's one in ten or two in ten.
Football fans are mostly men.
I sat down to think about it one day.
In any house you go to, if you see the men in the house, if it's about time to broadcast a football match, they will say, "ah, there's a football match."
They want to watch a match, they want to watch a match.
The women will say no, no, they want... it's Zee World they want to watch, or they want to watch Big Brother, or something.
Then they will start fighting over who holds the remote.
You know, or someone will say, "ah, no, we have to watch the game."
The others will go and sit down on one side, complaining.
Saying, "what do these people even like about watching football matches?"
"Are they paying you?"
"Do you know the players?"
Uh... a match that's got nothing to do with you, you'll sit down and want to kill yourself.
I sat down to think about it.
What makes men enjoy watching football matches?
So I sat down and found three things I noticed about what makes men enjoy watching football matches, which is different from women.
I'm not saying anyone is right or wrong.
But there are differences between men and women, which make men like football while the women don't really care for it.
And the first thing is that every man, right from when a male child is born (which means he's a small child), they're more competitive than women.
It's in their nature.
Once you have a male child, that yearning for competition is in his mind.
He wants to test himself against his friends, and see that he is the best.
That desire for competition is in us.
And we grow up with it.
Once, you notice that a man has grown to maturity, even if he himself cannot take part in competitions, he will want to watch the matches so he can say, "okay, these are the people I support".
And on the days they win, it will look like he's the who played and won.
That's why you see us.
We discuss football.
We will say, "ah, we beat these people, we beat those people."
You are a Chelsea fan; you are not a Chelsea fan, you weren't involved.
You've never been near to their stadiums but you will say we are the ones, we are the ones.
It's because we have identified with them.
Why?
Because of the competitive nature which is in men.
Secondly, every male child has that desire to see someone as his hero.
Men want to have heroes.
They have that need to... for someone to look up to, who they want to be like, right from childhood.
That's why men, if you see them watching (even when they are younger), they like watching cartoons like Ben Ten, they like things like Superman, they like Batman, they like Spiderman.
Why?
Because these are people who do things against all odds, and they will come out as champions.
This does something in a man's soul, and that's what makes us like watching football.
Because football gives us the heroes we look up to everyday.
People like Cristiano.
We'll see people like Messi, you will see people like Neymar, we see boys like uh... either Juan Mata, or Lukaku.
We see them.
And they are people who, even if we don't know anything about playing football, they represent us.
Then, we will make them our heroes.
And the third reason, every man wants to be a champion in something.
Even if you're not the one to take a ball with you to a field in order to play, you want to have that mentality that we got something done.
And we won, we achieved something, no matter the circumstances in which we found ourselves.
We have conquered all the odds which came up against us.
We have emerged as the champions.
And that's what every man likes.
So that's what makes men like to watch football more than women.
Because women... it's not that they don't like these things
But mstchew they don't really care about it.
Those kinds of things are not in a woman's psychology like they are in a man's.
So that's why women prefer to watch things which are calm, which have mild uh... stories.
You wanna know something?
That's why they watch Zee World, because it's a story,
That's why they watch Telemundo.
Why?
Because it's a story.
Not something where everythi-...
In fact, if you look at most women... not all women like action movies.
They like calm things where they tell stories which have sweet endings... happy endings.
That's what women like to watch.
But men are different.
So if we have this understanding between us, maybe women will stop harrassing men, saying, "why do men watch football matches?"
How is it that they can sit down and waste ninety minutes because you want to watch twenty-two boys kicking a ball around.
They don't understand.
If you sit down and think about it, you will be able to understand men.
Then you will let things be, saying "okay, I know how you feel, I know how you think."
"Sit down and watch your game."
"We don't mind."
"Go and enjoy yourself."
"We'll do ours later."
Thank you very much!
Uhuh, there are two ways he used to cook Egusi.
Step one, method one, is this.
You will f-... you'll have ground your pe-...
When your pepper is ground, keep it!
You understand?
Now, the pepper is kept to the side.
Your fish, everything, you will wash it and keep it like that.
And your Maggi [seasoning] (you'll have already crumbled the Maggi), keep it!
Then you will (on your stove), put it on the burner... put your pot on the burner.
When you have set your pot on the burner, uh... pour in palm oil.
When you've poured in palm oil, you will let it mstchew... let it heat up a little.
When it's heated up a little, just pour in your onion.
After you have poured in your onion, pour in your pepper.
When you have poured in your pepper, stir it.
After stirring, then you'll pour in water, add your Maggi, add your fish, put in everything.
Put in all your okporoko [stockfish].
Put it in!
After you've put it in, cover it so that it can boil a little.
When it's boiled, then put in your egusi.
The egusi you have already ground and put aside, you will add it.
But if it has... if you want it be lumpy, you will do something like press it.
Press the egusi so that oil will come out.
If oil comes out, you will start putting it in the sauce as if you are making crumbs in the sauce, like that.
When you've put it in the sauce like that, you will cover it for a period of ten to fifteen minutes.
When it's done, you will put in your ugwu [fluted pumpkin], or waterleaf.
Whatever leaf vegetable you have, just put it in.
Leave it for a minute or so.
The egusi sauce, it is ready.
That's step one.
That's step one, method one.
Another method to you cook egusi sauce your egusi, it will...
The ground egusi, you will make it... turn it into paste.
You will add water.
Just a little water!
Just a little water like that, you will add it that way.
Like you will stir it, stir it, stir it.
Keep it on the side!
You will put oil in a pot.
Instead of putting pepper in directly, like in the other method, this time around, it's the egusi you will pour directly into that oil which is already hot.
Now, as that oil has heated up, and since you have poured in your egusi, you will just be stirring it.
You will be stirring it till it starts to burn.
You will see that the thing is well fried.
In fact, it is starting to burn.
Then, you will pour in water.
You will pour in water and you will add your pepper.
Now, you will pour in your ingredients, your pepper, your fish, your, your stock, your okporoko.
If you like, you can put in bitter leaf.
When you've added it and you've added your Maggi, you will cover it so it can boil.
When it's boiled, then put in your leafy vegetable.
When you have put in your leafy vegetable, and you notice that it's done, bring it down!
Your egusi's ready.
Then ogbonno.
Ogbonno sauce.
Ogbonno sauce is very easy to cook, you know.
In fact, ogbonno... like some people... some people will be frying their pepper before they do the ogbonno.
But the method which everyone uses, well, around here, in this area of ours... you'll put water on the burner.
When you've put water on the burner, you'll add your pepper, your Maggi, your stockfish, your crayfish, your ponmo, everything.
Uh... you know your assorted meat, you'll add it all.
When you've put it all in, you'll put in your Maggi, and cover it.
Leave it to boil.
Then your egusi... your ground ogbonno... sorry, your ground ogbonno, you will mix it with oil.
You'll mix it until it's like a paste.
Get out your oil, then you will put it in that... the water.
It will boil, it will dissolve in the water.
When it's boiled, you'll notice that...
Because when it's boiled, it draws, everything will be normal.
Then, your ugwu, or your...
Yes, your ugwu which has been washed already, you will add it.
Just after a minute, bring it down.
Your ogbonno is ready.
That's all.
My name is Jacob from Kaduna.
When I grew up with my grandfather, he was the one taking care of me.
My parents are in Lagos.
That's where I stayed.
They brought me to Kagoro.
And I grew up there.
He enrolled me in a secondary school... he enrolled me in a primary school.
All the schools.
And I was very happy with him.
So much that he supports me in everything I do.
And when he... when I grew up, when I was about to get married, he was... he announced the name of a woman I don't know as my wife to be.
And at the time put forth by God, the wife came, as foretold by my grandfather.
And the way I got married at that time is not the... same as they do nowadays.
Now, they give so much money.
At that time, myself, I gave a bride price of two thousand naira.
In fact, they collected it saying they will... were very happy.
But nowadays, if you don't bring a goat, twenty bags of uh... cement, uh... twenty bags of uh... salt, rice, everything!
Even with a donkey, they'll say to bring one.
With a duck!
Look how the world is!
Is that how things will go on?
How will the next gene... generation be?
Maybe they will be asked to build houses for their parents.
We pray for God to help us in this generation, for things to get better.
And nowadays, even the women, maybe the men are not the ones looking for them.
Women are the ones looking for wom-... mow-... men, nowadays.
They want to get married by force.
I pray that God will help us look within ourselves so we'll see better things in life; for God to continue to be with us, and guide us.
And another thing is women don't compose themselves... they don't compose themselves.
They don't compose themselves at all.
If they compose themselves, dress well, look very beautiful, from there, men...
When we come back and see them, and say we want to marry them.
But we have different traditions.
The Southerners have their traditions, as do the Northerners and the Middle Belters.
Some are, are, are conservative about it.
Some spend a lot of money on it.
So we don't know how we will bring things together.
Maybe God will help us reverse all these things, so we will come together as a family, as Nigerians, to help one another do things as God will help us, that we will be uh... very happy with it.
That's the way it is.
But uh... the question I want to ask is, "how will Nigerians come together?"
Such that we'll have a common bride price, that we (will) become one, that we...
In some places, parents won't be burdened while in some other places, they will be burdened.
In a lot of places, if you don't bring a lot of things, they won't give her to you.
They will say you should build a house for them.
In some, some pla-... places again, they will say, "just take her!"
They give her to you.
So how can we bring this thing together, and help ourselves?
Oh!
We thank God that in His infinite mercy He will help us... will really help us.
He knows that these things will get better, and change us in Nigeria.
And we pray that God will hel-... give us good people who will listen to us.
And they will hear about all these things, so that they will come together and make sure we have good things in Nigeria.
Thanks be to God!
And in many of the places we see now, in our hospitals, a lot of people are sick.
Sometimes, there are no drugs.
They will still be there.
Problems.
Problems.
No one will be able to go to the hospitals again because there's no money.
By money, I mean that some can afford food, some cannot.
Some can afford to pay hospital bills while some cannot pay hospital bills.
How can we resolve these things in this country?
We pray our God will help us... pray that God will help us.
And our leaders, they should make sure that they help the poor ones do things that will help us in life.
Our doctors are going on strike again.
People are dying.
So where are we heading?
Where are we heading?
Doctors as well, have mercy on us.
And also the government, they should make sure that the doctors are paid.
They should come... they should help the poor, they should reduce the high cost of drugs for our sake.
For those of us who can't pay so much money, they should please help us... they should please help us... they should please help us.
And we will move on to schools as well.
With schools, if you are not rich, you will not have access to quality education.
The primary level, if you are not rich, some people cannot even even afford pay five hundred naira.
Some parents can't afford to pay five hundred naira, not to mention two hundred naira.
We pray that God will help us because we are looking to God to provide everything we say... we are praying for.
And when God touches their, their hearts, they will look to the poor.
We pray for God to help us.
Even the way we eat, money for food, money, money, you can't even afford to buy a bit of rice.
They will tell you that a measure of rice costs six hundred naira.
What work will a guy do to make six hundred naira for a measure of rice?
Not to mention the other stuff you put in.
You will buy Maggi seasoning, pepper, and tomatoes.
Onions, how much will you pay?
How much will you make?
You have many children, twelve children, six children, seven children, on your small measure of rice, one measure will not be enough for them.
And even if you worked, payments won't be made.
So many of the people who have quit work are dying.
No payments.
Salaries are not being paid.
Everywhere, etin-... everything is hard.
So, what do they want us to do?
And many of the things which have been happening is because ritual activities have taken over the country.
Cases of kidnapping are everywhere for the purpose of making money.
A government is paying all these things X for, for the staff, giving them everything.
At least, everything for the better.
They caught someone there, caught someone there, shot everybody, killed everybody.
So, where are we going... where are we going... where are we going?
The military men who says they are... they are the ones guiding us, they are killing them.
So, we don't love one another.
There are problems, problems, problems everytime.
Where do you want us to run to?
Should we leave Nigeria for you?
Or should we leave Nigeria for the people doing these things?
If we leave Nigeria for you, how many people will stay behind?
Eyinaya Family, will you be able to stay in Nigeria?
Just you?
It can't be possible.
God, help us so that our soldiers will also help us.
Take a look at the rains!
Drain everywhere!
Floods wash away people's belongings, floods are taking people's lives.
No good roads, no standard drainages.
Everything, problems.
God, help us... God, help us!
Let our X leaders listen to us!
Let them hear God's voice and do the... what they were assigned to do.
They warned them to be good.
Not, not that they should, should take care of themselves alone and leave the poor to die.
If the poor die, who will they govern?
No one!
We pray that God will help them to see these things, and also help us.
Uh... my name is John Nkemjika Nwobo.
I come from Imo State.
Well my people, I mean, things are difficult.
Because uh... I remember, that in Jonathan's era, everyone was just showing off, but things are difficult under this Buhari regime.
I wanna... I'm just wondering what will happen within, I mean the citizens, in the next ten years.
The way things are going now, it's not funny at all.
Um... like if you think back to the Jonathan era, contracts were awarded and people had work to do.
Well um... they were giving out things, people were travelling.
Traveling is very easy, but nowadays, it's like nothing is happening.
I wonder what's happening in Nigeria right now.
Well my friend, I really believe that the situation in this country nowadays is something uh... we all need to get together and talk about.
We all need to get together, talk about it, figure out how we will solve our problems.
Because, we cannot leave... let Americans come and solve our problems.
We need to do it by ourselves.
When, when you talk about um... the students now, for you to... um... it's not easy for you to get into school now.
You need to struggle.
You will take...
You will come across people who didn't take... who didn't even take the examination, you will see them get in while you who rested... struggled to sit for the Post UME and everything else... you need to stay back and, and then you need to say, "okay, go ahead...."
You have to struggle beforehand if you don't have anyone to help you.
That's how this country is.
So if you want anything in Nigeria now, you need to be well connected.
In fact, the other day, I had... I went to uh... a party with my girl.
As soon as we went into the hall of the event, the women just started asking me who invited me.
I had to tell her that it was a certain woman before she would give me a plate of rice!
Imagine!
Even getting a plate of rice in Nigeria now involves connections.
Uhm!
It's not easy at all, but...
Well man, what I am really thinking of uh... the country is that we should just find means ( I mean, know how) things we will do to solve our present problems.
Because if we are waiting for our government, they will not help us.
And also, my fellow youths like me also...
And I also advise them when it comes to...
Like our guys who are into the fraudulent acts known as Yahoo, and other stuff like that, that stuff doesn't pay at all.
That stuff doesn't pay.
I noticed some guys recently, they will tell you that this guy riding this car is no superhero.
Myself, I want to be like him.
But all those things don't add value.
We need to like... just identify what we can do on our own.
Like if you go to China now, you will see young boys... they're the ones making these phones we use; they send them to us and we buy them.
Because all those cars we use were designed by young boys like us.
But here in Nigeria, we're always going into fraudulent acts called Yahoo and/or oil bunkering, and the like.
Uh... but I sure know that those, those things don't pay at all.
So uh... we just have to work hard, then think ahead, and come up with solutions to our problems.
For instance, just now, I remember when I worked with an Indian man.
I, I tried to save a bit of money and bought a small car, which I used for commercial purposes.
That was uh... four back... four years back, but one of my guys made the comment, "man, this is beneath you!"
But I told the guy that it's just... with time, and perseverance, things will surely be alright.
It was through that taxi that I met...
As we speak... through that taxi, I met the HR Manager of Total, the Mr Didebey from France.
And since I met that man, things have changed in my life.
The man advised me on education, the man has guided me.
He told me that he himself went through what I am going through at the moment.
But he later excelled in life.
But I should just continue to do my things the way I believe it should be done, and God will really see me through.
Even as you and I are talking, the man has gone back to France.
But the man still...
But everyday, he and I chat on WhatsApp.
He calls me.
He still introduces me to people who will be able to like assist me uh... maybe when I graduate, so that I can get uh... a good job that will change my life.
So that's how life is.
Life isn't really easy.
And I don't believe that if you were born poor, you will remain poor.
It depends on how, how you struggle, and how you want to really help yourself.
Well, when you... when people say that people like Dangote, Otedola, and the rest... that it's because... that it's... I don't believe it.
Because if you read Dangote's history, and all those rich men of today, the way they started, yourself, you will wonder whether...
I mean, you will just imagine that it was not their parents who laid the foundation for them.
It's just they... something they really wanted to do, and how they would work things out in their lives, to ensure they live a better life.
So I really believe that when you believe in yourself, you'll really make it in life.
You don't need to depend on anyone.
You don't need to... you don't need like...
Since maybe because your parents didn't give birth to you, your parents are poor, that's why you are poor.
Don't, don't think like that.
It's all those negative thoughts that will really push you backwards.
So uh... about my parents, I thank them for bringing me into this world, and I am aware of the situation at hand, and uh... all... everything I need to do is to work hard in order to ensure that my younger ones, or my unborn children will not go through what I'm going through.
My name is Adeniyi Moruf Mustapha.
Uh... my... I, I... my State is Oyo State.
Although I was born in Lagos and everything about me is in Lagos, I do it... I, I attended uh... CMS [Church Missionary Society] Primary School, which is in Bariga.
And uh... from there, I attended uh... CMS Grammar School, which is also in Bariga.
And myself, where I am staying is very close to... is very close to Bariga.
So Bariga is not my birth place!
Ab-... I mean, I am not a ga-... Bariga boy.
But in one way or the o-...
Uh somehow, somehow I will say uhuh, I am with Bariga in a way... in a way.
So there was a time that my father felt I was not doing well in CMS where I was.
Then he decided to take me to uh... a boarding school.
Maybe that will help me improve.
So I went to...
Then he took me to Ibadan.
So I went to Emmanuel College High School.
Uh... from there... I spent only one year.
Afterwards, it looks like he was not really happy with the thing.
Then he said, okay, it looks like I, I, I, I n-... I, I still wasn't performing like he wanted.
That's m-... uh... I mean, my result happened to show that I was not up to the standard I should have been.
So he brought me back to Lagos.
Then I went to a Muslim School.
The name is Toyyibat Comprehensive High School.
And that was where I finished my Secondary School education.
But what I will remember... why...
Because I studied...
Uh... I studied Accounting in school.
But if I remember well enough what led me into studying this subject... because the thing that, that I really wanted to do was Electrical Engineering.
Because I remember that I used to get my hands into everything uh... electrical when I was a kid.
And I, I really love the job.
So he called me this one day.
When I was...
I think I was in Senior Secondary School [SS] One.
He called to ask what profession I would like to go into.
If I... If I wanted to go to school...
And myself uh... when, when...
Before he took me to Ibadan, I was in CMS.
B-... uhuh... before he took me to Ibadan, when I was in CMS, I...
After my uh... JSS three, when I came back, I was about to start SS.
So I remember that I didn't... I didn't continue.
Maybe I may...
What I can... I can say I was responsible for is that I did not resume for the SS [Senior Secondary] classes on time.
So by the time I decided to resume studying, the science class which should have led me into the path of Electrical Engineering was already in full swing.
So when I attended classes with them for like uh... almost... nearly a month had passed already, mstchew!
I just felt like I wasn't understanding what they were doing.
I just took my chair to uh... art... uh... art class.
No.
Art class!
So I was done with the second term when my dad called me.
And I know that what t-... led to this again was that there was no one to tell me that if you want to do such and such thing, don't leave the...
So since I had moved into the art class, he asked, "what exactly do you want to do?"
Then I said electrical engineering.
He said uh... "you are fooling yourself!"
"Electrical engineering?"
"And you are in art class?"
He said, "you've missed it, that means you won't be able to go for it."
He said I should think of uh... anything... another thing I will be able to do, which will be in line with my current class.
Then I said it's banking, and finance.
He said he didn't like banking and finance.
It will just tie me to one place.
I won't be able to...
That I'll only be in the bank, and uh... these people who are into money, money things, mstchew.
So he said...
In fact, it was my father who picked accounting for me.
Because he felt that with accounting, you can work anywhere.
So from there, when I finished in uh... in Toyibat... luckily, when I finished in two thousand and... nineteen ninety four, by nineteen ninety five, early uh... in uh...
When it was (uh... I think) January nineteen ninety five, or ninety... in February, I got into Oko Polytechnic.
Oko Polytechnic is a small school in Anambra State.
Uh... Federal Polytechnic, Oko... I had my ND [National Diploma] education there.
Then I had my uh... IT [Industrial Training] in a Federal, Federal Ministry.
After which I came to Yaba Tech, for my HND.
And I...
It was accounting I studied.
Then, later, I went to Imo for my Service.
But there was a time I had a fire accident.
So I still had the injury I got from that fire accident when I reported for service.
So... and because I didn't want to stay there, I wrote a letter to them saying I have uh... medical issues.
So they should post me back to...
That was how the whole thing worked out fine.
I was posted back to Lagos.
So I finished my, my uh... service in Lagos.
Then, my father was someone who really loved education.
He loved education, which means that the... he knew he made a mistake by not... by not putting me in the right place from the beginning.
But after that, he started monitoring my education.
Said he wanted... he wanted to make sure that this profession I'm in, the highest... the, the level which anyone who is into this course reaches, reaches, you will also get there and he will not let me rest.
So I got uh... a job in Lagos State.
But when I got to Lagos State, the salary wasn't great.
And if you want to go for that kind of course, it requires a lot of money.
And my father mstchew, he didn't as have much on him as when he... when we were little.
So he b-... he was like "you've started working, right?
"You, you, you are able to... you are able to support yourself to, you know, wherever you want to go."
So he has been on my neck since then because I started this job in two thousand, and one.
So he was on my neck.
So every year, he will be telling you haven't taken your ICAN [Institute of Chartered Accountants of Nigeria] exams.
That you're, you're just like someone who... you're in a pool with everyone else.
If you... if you qualified as a member of ICAN, that means you'd stand out from the others.
He kept giving me that until one day when one mir-... when there was a miracle in my life.
Because anytime I want to start this exam, I get held back by a lack of money.
I don't have money.
I even met with my boss saying, "boss, please lend me some money so I can start this thing!"
He said uh... said uh... he didn't know what I wanted to do with the ICAN thing.
That people who do ANAN can also make it.
In fact, at that time, I had even given up saying, "okay, let me do this ANAN."
Then I was told that I would need to wait another eight months before I could join ANAN.
So I figured instead of waiting for eight months, why don't I just start the uh... ICAN?
This particular one, I can start right away.
That's what took my mind off ANAN.
So I waited for two years after that before I could get money.
How did it happen?
That day, I just got married.
I got married in two thousand, and eight.
My, my first kid was born in two thousand, and nine
So I can remember that on a particular Sunday when my ki-... mstchew, when there was no money to eat.
I was just staring blankly.
Ah God, I said, "what kind of life is this?"
So from that point, I also believed that mstchew... this job I'm doing isn't what I'm meant to be doing.
That if I just got my ICAN certificate now I could leave this place and go to another company, where I will get paid better.
Mstchew, so I was thinking on that particular day.
So I got to the office on Monday.
And I am not bragging.
I'm the hardworking type.
But on that day, I was restless and mtschew... I couldn't do much.
Okay.
I was in the office, working.
And then one, one of my...
The woman is older than me, but I am her senior...
She is older than me in age, but my rank at work is higher than hers.
So she told me uh... Mr Mustapha, will you take part in this uh... this uh... I dont know what... how they call it... these uh... monthly money contributions where someone will collect all the money contributed this month and another will collect...
I said, "look, mstchew... I don't have time."
Me, how much money will I make?
Eleven thousand naira.
So now I'll get into this kind of mstchew...
So on second thought, I reconsidered it and thought okay.
I figured that uh... even if I don't... if, if it's not my turn the first month, I can beg the person who is to collect the first one.
He should give me his own portion.
When it's my turn, he will collect it.
At least, I should take...
Maybe this will help me start the ICAN examination.
So mstchew... I said, "okay, I will take part in it."
So they said we will pick numbers.
So they put num-... they wrote numbers on a paper.
They rolled them up and put them in a plastic container.
They asked us to start picking the numbers.
When it was...
When the third person picked, then they all said that... the remaining two people said that if I don't pick...
That they... if I don't pick mine, they would not pick theirs.
Mstchew, I just prayed to God saying, "God, I am in your hands!"
So I picked mine.
So when we all picked the numbers, we started showing the numbers.
Everyone started opening the papers, saying uh... someone picked second.
I said, "uh... supposing I was the one who picked the second number, I would have loved it."
Another person picked number five.
Then I was asked to accept my fate.
I said, "oh, why do you want me to open mine now?"
They said, "why?"
As soon as I opened it, number one.
That was how I started my ICAN exams that time.
So I met with my father.
I told him "you were the one who wanted me to start these exams."
I have thirty thousand and I want to start lectures.
I need i-... fifty five or so.
Then he, he wrote me a check that day.
That's how I just started.
And under... wi-... eh... within two years, I made it.
So that's my ICAN story.
And I was so brilliant that time.
Thank God!
So...
Uh... good afternoon.
My name is Lekan.
And myself, I work with Lasaco Assurance PLC.
And basically, what we do isn't just collecting money from people.
And I know that you have heard about insurance before.
And you will be asking the question, "what exactly do they do in insurance companies?"
We're very simple.
You know that in life, there is danger everywhere.
You sleep, you wake up, you take your bath.
You go out.
It's a risk in itself.
And in our company, what we do is that all those risks that people face (you look for what to eat on a daily basis), those are the risks we accommodate.
That is... we protect you so that if anything happens, we will give you money.
See!
With insurance, you see, you can...
We can protect anything you place value on, anything you love, anything you treasure.
That's what insurance does for people.
We can insure your car, we can insure your life and we can insure your house.
Even your children who you love, we can make insurance policies for them.
And all these things have their own benefits.
Not that someone will just be collecting your money, and you will be afraid.
Nobody knows what will happen tomorrow.
Someone can sleep and not wake up tomorrow.
And you already have plans to send your lovely child to school.
Insurance can guarantee that the child will go to school whether you're around or not.
So, Insurance is beautiful.
But as time goes on, we know that we will get to a level in this country of ours and everyone will appreciate what insurance does for people.
To enjoy life, to sleep with both eyes closed.
In fact, don't be going k-...
Older people say that if you want to go to sleep, leave one eye opened, but we can guarantee you that with insurance uh... you can sleep with both eyes closed.
No problem.
We've got your back covered.
So that's what insurance does for people.
Thank you!
Sometimes, you will be wondering about insurance packages for rich people... can someone who is not wealthy buy an insurance packages?
See, the truth is that there's an insurance package for everyone.
But because we are afraid because of the impression that only someone who doesn't need... who has lots of money, can buy insurance packages, but with five thousand naira, you can also buy life insurance policies.
You can protect your house with less than five thousand.
Insurance was not created for rich people.
In fact, it's more beneficial to people who really don't have much money.
If you built a house and your house is worth maybe ten million naira, the amount you will pay us to protect your house in case of a fire isn't even three thousand naira.
So compare... you should compare the amount you will pay to the danger that will come up if that house gets burnt!
So whether you are rich or poor, for any product you want to buy, you will be the one to tell us the protection you need, and we will offer you some advice.
We will tell you the amount you will pay, what you can protect, how you will go about it.
See, insurance is beautiful, even in schools, anywhere you are, in the church too.
I know that pastors will ask you to put your faith in God.
That God's got your back covered.
It's true!
It's not a lie!
But God... since God has already gotten your back covered, He has also given you brains, which you are supposed to use to protect yourself.
That's what insurance does.
Make...
I am not telling you that God does not protect people.
No!
God protects people.
He's got our backs covered, for sure, but you also ought to do a thing or two.
You should add a thing or two.
So that everything will stand strong and if anything happens, you are sure that the fund you need to keep you on your feet is available somewhere.
It's not a good thing to be at work, searching for what to eat, and then something happens, and you cannot make money again.
If you are unable to make money again with insurance... will the money you were making while you were still working keep coming in?
Insurance will ensure that any money you were making before... in fact, now that something has come up, whether it's in the form of an accident or a sickness, or death...
I know you will speak.
We all pray to live a long life.
That's it!
But if it happens, insurance has guaranteed that if death eventually occurs... that if it happens, there's an amount of money which they will give your family members like "the loss you suffered, your husband or your wife has planned for that, he had such things on their mind for you."
Insurance can help you get what you have in mind, whether you are around or not.
You can come, and you can insure anything.
You know in... so far you love that thing, you, you know that that thing uh... is very important.
Insurance is the answer you ought to get.
Insurance is the way out, which will protect everything you value in this life.
It can be your life, it can be your wife, it can be your children.
It can be their education, since you want them to go to school, they should study, they should become lawyers, they should become doctors, they should become anything in life.
Insurance will help you achieve that.
In fact, if you were employed before but later became unemployed, insurance can still protect the salary you were earning, the one you were being paid by your employer.
So it doesn't matter if...
Oh, I've lost my job, I can't keep paying.
In fact, when you're retired, when you've told your employer that I've been working for you long enough, and now, I want to rest and enjoy my money, insurance can protect that money as well.
Which means that if you spent all the money they gave you, we will continue paying you as far as you've asked us to protect the money which you collected.
We call that annuity.
So you will realise that if you take a good look at insurance, it is full of advantages.
Not that someone will collect your money.
In fact, it is so beautiful that once you enter into business with us, you will enjoy it.
We were established for your sake.
We have come to serve you.
And the amount you will pay is not so much.
So if you have informed us of what you want to protect, we'll advise you that okay, since you have told us what you want to protect, we will tell you that you will pay a little bit of money.
If you combine... if you compare the amount you will pay and what you want to protect, you will realize that it is indeed a small amount of money.
You s-... hustled... struggled to buy a million naira car.
You pay fifty thousand naira to protect that car.
If it gets stolen, you will get another one; if it gets burnt, you will get another one.
If you hit someone, and someone... or someone hits your car, we will repair it for you.
So you should look into it too.
Fifty thousand to one million, you will think that it's a small amount of money.
Even for your life, your properties, anything... the money we will give you as compensation based on the fact that you have a contract with us, that we want to protect you, if you compare it to the money which you, you will pay us, it's just a small amount of money.
You will not even feel the impact on your pockets.
It's not even up to the amount you will sp-... spend to have fun between January and December.
So with this money you spend anyhow, you can protect yourself, protect your children, protect your family members, and protect the people around you.
That's what insurance has come to do for people.
Thank you!
This is where we prepare shawarma, and this place is Lucky Special Shawarma, which we make here.
Well, I'm the one who makes it.
My name is Fidelis Isaac.
About shawarma, it has...
We have it in grades.
It comes in grades.
So we have the one worth five hundred naira.
And the one which is worth seven hundred.
The other one is one thousand naira.
That... all of the shawarmas are big.
We have one which is Chicken Shawarma.
And as this is one of the favorites, the one for five hundred, we make it with just one sausage.
The one for seven hundred, we make it with two sausages.
But the one for one thousand has two sausages, and it will be jumbo size.
So since we make it here, the market is growing because the price is this uh... constant, you know.
Now, the ingredients we use is salad.
Salad is cabbage.
We'll slice it, add carrot, add uh... corn, green beans, and all these things.
And uh... you will add beef.
Beef comes from cows.
You will add uh... chicken.
Chicken is a bird, you now.
So this is pepper which we also add.
And this is Lebanese bread... Chinese bread.
We put all these ingredients on it and then we fold and wrap it.
This is my toaster.
So these are the things we use to make shawarma.
And for someone to sell Shawarma, it's all about, you know, time, and discipline.
So it's a... it's a commitment thing.
That's... we do it here.
So since jobs are not readily available in Nigeria nowadays, that's why we said we should be making shawarma.
At least to create an opportunity for work.
Uh... this is Ajegunle.
So um... we do okay enough business.
That's why the price is as low as five hundred naira, so that people will buy it.
And by His... by the grace of God, they are buying... they are buying... they are trying.
Anyone who wants to pass... who wants to buy, they will come in.
That's why I stay here to sell it.
That's how it is.
Taking myself for instance, I'm here in this place... this side of Ajegunle, I open by one o clock in the afternoon and I close by eleven.
So at that time, I believe that people coming back from work will stop at my spot... my Shawarma Spot, to buy some.
Um... that's all.
Good morning!
I'd like to say hi to you this morning.
I am Awa Olowookere, Assistant Co-Commander; the Unit Commander of Isolo, for the Federal Road Safety Corps.
Road Safety Corps members are the people who stand on the road, who you see on the road, who get you pissed off if you notice that they stopped you on the road.
But now, that's not the only thing we do.
Our duty in the Road Safety Corps is to teach road users.
And we are all road users.
So we make sure that we get from the office to the churches and mosques.
We go talk to people about safety on the road.
We tell people all the things they're supposed to do... which they need to do in to make sure that their vehicles are ready to drive on the road.
Because not all vehicles are road worthy.
You could have abandoned a vehicle for some time; the vehicle is just parked there while you travelled.
When you come back, you walk up to the vehicle, wash it, turn the engine on and off you go.
When you get to so-... the road, the vehicle will stop and you will start complaining.
That's what we are talking about.
So before you move your vehicle in the morning, you're supposed to check it out.
There are some things you're supposed to check.
You're supposed to check the radiator, check the water level in it.
You'll check the oil.
You should check if the vehicle is due... if it's due for servicing, or if the oil is still... (there's uh... something we call viscosity) you will feel the, the, the viscosity of the oil to know if it's still high enough to use your vehicle.
Because if you don’t check all these things...
Check your tires.
You know something?
The tire is the only part which makes contact with the road.
As you sit in the vehicle, the tire controls the vehicle, it makes it move.
Because, you know, motor vehicles are made of iron.
The iron parts alone cannot move.
So we're telling you that you need to check your tires.
Before you buy tires, look at the manufacturing date.
You won't see an expiration date on tires.
It's the manufacturing date... the day the tire was made.
So when you look at the day, you wit-...
The first two numbers on the tire...
You'll see four numbers but the first two numbers are for the week that the tire was produced.
Then the last two numbers will tell you the year.
So if you see a tire which was made... which you... that says one one fourteen, that means the tire... that tire was produced in the eleventh week of twenty fourteen.
So you will add four years.
That will tell you the expiration date of that tire.
So you need to be checking your tires.
Don’t just look at the physical appearance of the tires to decide that uh... it's in good shape, this tire is still road worthy, it's a good tire.
No!
Check your tires!
And when you go, if you want to uh... check your tires, look at your car door.
If you open the door, you will see the side of the door.
An iron which is called metal is right on the door.
You will see the pressure expected to be in each of your tires there.
And that limit is what you're supposed to inf-... pump air into... pump your tire to.
So if you inflate your tire within... with the limit indicated on those instructions, it will be good for you.
So you won't have the problem of your tire being over... you over-inflating your tire, meaning that there is too much or too little air in it.
Because if there is too much air in a tire, there is...
Ah, you know how it is with a balloon.
If you blow it up... blow it up... blow it up and you just touch it with a sharp object... any sharp thing, what will happen?
It will burst.
And then we will be shouting, "ah, the tire has burst, the tire has..."
Something made the tire burst because as the tire is moving on the road, it gets heated up.
And the road gets hot too.
Our weather affects it as well.
So putting all these things together, and when you go into a ditch, pah!
Little do you know that this tire is no good anymore, you will go a little ways more and it will burst.
So in the... you need to put the tire... inflate the tire to the correct level.
And again, if your tire's deflated (that's what we call under-inflation)... under-inflation also affects tires.
It disturbs tires because when you put loads into your car and you enter into the tire... the car, it will press on the tire.
And you, you see that the tire is coming apart on both sides.
If you blow too much air into it, it will come apart in the middle, but if you...
You know the air... if there's not much air in the tire, it will be coming apart in the, the...
If you notice that the two sides of your tire are getting smooth, you will say, "imagine, I just bought this tire and it's getting smooth."
The air in your tire is not up to the correct level.
So you're supposed to check your tire so it doesn't over-inflate or under-inflate.
Another thing we tell people is if you must drive, if you have to drive a car (you have bought a car and you have a license), don't drink alcohol, alcohol, all brands of distilled liquor, all these drinks which are being sold by the roadsides.
Because those drinks contain things which have different effects on the human body.
If you're... if you drink alcohol, your vision will be different from somone who isn't under the influence.
It will affect you.
You could be looking straight ahead and see nothing, even though someone has come out in front of you.
A bicycle has... someone riding a bicycle has caught up with you.
You won't see them because you've drunk something that stops you from seeing clearly.
And if you are driving, you're supposed to... you... you...
We, we do have a saying.
You drive with your eyes, and see with your mind.
If you're driving a car, you are the one... you are seeing [with your eyes] but it's your mind that's calculating everything.
Look at the buildings here and there.
Everywhere is full of houses, houses... beautiful houses... beautiful houses... beautiful houses.
Ours is not wi-...
We are not different from them.
The same thing do... we are the same.
So all those kinds of things, it's not good.
It's good if you... if... that... they should give a helping hand to your people, they should help those... the people who are better... help people who are better than you because you don’t know where the help will come from.
So this year... I know that this year... this year will not pass me by.
And this year, I already know that this is my year.
And it's my year of testimonies, my year of blessings, my year of divine... made... uh, uh, uh mercy, that’s what this year is.
So I know that as this year is moving on, myself, I am moving along with it.
I am following it closely.
Because I know that the way this year is presently... the way I am looking at this year, I know that the year is sh-... will bring good fortunes to me.
So, so this year, I have committed everything to the hands of God
That... I know that there's no way this year will not be good for me!
So I am praying that as this year goes on, let it begin.
People with no professional training (because working as a security guard is not a profession), if you know that you are still young enough to learn a trade, you'd better go for the training.
If you prefer to go into business, you go into it.
He should introduce you to anyone he feels comfortable with.
Because people have worked as security guards... I have met some people.
Myself, it's been three months now.
That I've been on the job, but those three months feel like a hundred years to me.
Some people said they have been on this job for twenty years, got married with the proceeds, had five children... had ten children, without a house.
They don’t even have a place to lay their heads, which is not good.
So whoever knows that...
The things he will do will bring him good luck.
If it is work, you will go and learn.
If it is houseboy and you still have enough time, you go and be a houseboy.
Being a houseboy does not bring good luck, but it does bring some people good luck.
But when you're well behaved... but it's better to go for some vocational training.
Engage yourself!
In the next four or five years, you'll have become your own boss.
Before you know it, in two or three years and you'll have eased off.
He's started living large, bought equipment or tools, rented an apartment, bought land to build a house on, begun to enjoy life like the others.
But now wa-... the way we feel nowadays... we need quick money.
Bringing in money is what we need now.
We need to go and bring in money.
Because the way we are looking at the world, it looks as if it is late already.
But I know that it's not late yet.
But I know that God will do it.
God will do it because we were destined to help our mother who is in the village.
And since we were born into a poor family, there's no money.
We were not even given money for a soft landing here.
They are looking up to us.
December is over, we didn't go.
New Year's is over, we didn't go.
And they're still looking out for us.
There's no way you arrive the village without taking bread along... you can't go to the village without taking bread along.
You will buy the traditional wear for your mothers, and you'll still give your mother some pocket money worth between five thousand to ten thousand naira.
So the woman will be smiling as she takes from it, saying that uh... her son is back.
Imagine that you go empty handed.
No money; nothing.
My brother, it will like if your case is different.
But I know that this year, all those things will become a thing of the past.
This year, any boy who will be travelling this year...
We're in January now.
From now on till December, everyone will buy cars.
In fact, before you go home, if you will be driving down, tippers... about fifty tipper loads of sand will follow you.
One trailer of uh... cement, they'll follow you so that people will know that yes, God has remembered the people they've forgotten about for many years.
Isn't this the case for us?
Our case is no different.
And our God's reach is long enough to save us.
And uh... he, he hears our cry every day.
He hears our prayers every day, but I know that there is time for everybody when God blesses, blesses them... there is time for everyone when God says, "ti-... today is your day."
The day you get your own blessings.
And I know that God will do it for us.
So we won't...
If we are looking up to someone as the one to bless you, that means you will not get blessed.
Rather than your brother looking to you to bless you, he will bless another person.
Or he will ask you to go find your own blessings, since he found his own.
So if you're looking up to someone to get blessings from, that means you will won't get blessed in life.
So go anywhere you know that your breakthrough will come from.
And the way...
Any strong place.
Go there right away!
Not just anywhere.
Some places will lead you to death while others will lead you to victory.
But with the situation of things in Nigeria at present, nobody knows where to get solace.
You don’t know whether to go into politics or go into business or which person should become a bus driver, or go into business, or become an errand boy, or what exactly?
What we've gotten ourselves into has become a problem.
It's even killed... it's brought death to us already.
But we will still have a way out, and the way out will make for a good escape.
Yes!
So as I speak, I have put it into God's hands for Him to settle us this year.
And as we are talking about it today, the tenth day of January, twenty eighteen, God is... will surely keep going until the year two thousand and twenty.
And as we have started talking about it today, boy, it's reaching God's ears, and He is listening to us.
And that's how...
He said anything we say in Jesus' name, so be it.
And that’s how he will mark it.
And as we are talking about it in this moment, we have put it into God's hands so He will do us good in Jesus' name.
Amen!
Alright, sports fans, welcome to another wonderful morning on Sports Radio, eighty eight point nine, Brilla for real, ah... an outstanding station in the nation; a station that brings the whole country to a standstill when it comes to sports!
And I tell you, if you're not here, you're lost.
Testimony time is not meant for the dead and dumb!
Let me take you straight to France uh... where Paris St Germain Captain, Tiago Silva, said that what is happening to Edinson Cavani and Javier Pastore is not good for the French giants uh... as they continued to leave them on the bench uh... Cavani and Pastore were not on the squad list as Paris Saint Germain reached the Cup de La Cupa semi finals, courtesy of their two - zero victory over Famyes uh... on Wednesday, following their late return to training.
And from there, let me tell you another one from France.
From there to England, you don’t need a passport, you don’t need a visa.
Just follow me on my bicycle.
Let me tell you that Antonio Conte has told Chelsea that it's better for them to discover how to score goals again uh... after they were held to a mid-week zero - zero draw by Everton, that was four days from the one in Norwich.
As they play goalless ties, he has come out to say that we will not continue this way.
Are you planning to go higher by these means?
You need to make sure that with your playing style, you begin to score goals, otherwise, the issue will get out of hand.
And let me take you straight to the top stories in the world of sports.
And let me inform you that Everton uh... has joined the race to sign Arsenal forward, Theo Walcott.
The boy is twenty eight years old.
The Englishman is also wanted by his former club, Southampton.
While the Gunners are also asking for thirty million pounds uh... for the boy.
And let me tell you that RB Leipzig in Germany uh... has informed Guinean international midfielder, Naby Keita, that he will join Liverpool this month.
The Reds have already agreed to sign the twenty two year old in the summer at a sum of forty eight million pounds.
They have stated that if they add fifteen million to twenty million pounds in January uh... the boy can leave as soon as possible.
The Republic of Ireland's head coach, Martin O'Neill, is getting set to take charge of Stoke City as he is speaking with the manager who lost his job when he was sacked by an SMS telling him, "Mr Man, you have done enough."
And let me tell you the last story coming from Arsenal.
Let me inform you that the former Arsenal Striker, Ian Wright uh... has asked Messi's agent to make sure that if the guy moves to Manchester United, he will perform very well.
He said Ozil who had no issues at the end of the season uh... the German international playmaker is closing on a new signing deal to let Alexis Sanchez out of Emirates Stadium.
The twenty nine year old who has worked with Jose Mourinho while at Real Madrid uh... has announced that if he moves to Manchester United, he will perform very well because the kind of mentality they have uh... and the level of players uh... on top of the league uh... are different from what you get from the youngsters uh... running up and down in Arsenal's jersey.
And let me inform you that in Spain uh... a man named Zinedine Zidane has said that his new contract does not ma-... is of no concern to him at all following his side's two matches, with a draw at home with... against the second tier side, Numancia.
Concerning the Copa del Rey which came up on Wednesday, Madrid settled for a five - two aggregate uh... with their first three - zero victory over the kids to ensure they got through to the next stage uh... of the competition.
My people, this is where I will call it a day this wonderful morning, so don't worry.
My name remains Apostle of the Comedy Kings on the microphone.
I say as things unfold this morning, stay in charge!
If you drink, do not drive; if you drive, don’t drink!
If you really have to drink something, let it be cold and pure water.
Thank you, my people!
Now, Radio Sapientia, ninety five point three FM, Onitsha, you are all enjoying yourselves this beautiful evening as five of the crew uncles are already seated inside.
Today is Wednesday, the tenth, two thousand and eighteen, and my name is Jovia Uchena.
The National Examination Council has released the two thousand and seventeen November December Senior School Certificate Examination results.
Another one here says the Independent National Electoral Commission has brought out guidelines, and also a schedule of activities relating to the elections.
And they asked all the political parties to quickly go and collect forms for all elections.
That this should be done before August twenty fourth, two thousand and eighteen.
The Joint Admissions and Matriculation Board has fixed February sixth as the final deadline.
They will sell the registration forms for this year's Unified Tertiary Matriculation Examination.
And another report here says that the Delta State's Commissioner for Information, that is Mister Patrick Ukah, congratulates all the twenty three Chairmen of Local Government Councils.
They just got elected in the Local Government Councils.
He said that they should not act disgracefully because the people who voted them into power have the utmost faith in them that they will try as much as possible to fulfil all the promises made during election campaigns.
And the last one here is from abroad and it's from uh... Zimbabwe.
The Anti Corruption Agency has been probing into whether or not the former First Lady, Grace Mugabe, obtained her doctorate degree in a fraudulent manner.
Remember that she was awarded an honorary doctorate just after she gained admission into the university in two thousand and fourteen.
And even before anyone can get a doctorate degree, they must have put in many years of full time research.
And this is where I will call it a day and take a break as you continue to enjoy the programs on Radio Sapientia, ninety five point three FM, Onitsha.
My people, that is today's five o' clock news flash.
This is the end of the story.
My name is Jovia Uchena.
Do remember that big eyes do not guarantee good sight, nor does having a big head translate to being in control.
Good evening.
Who's there?
It is God.
What!
This is how my life is now.
I do appreciate God.
God is doing wondrous things in my life.
That's it.
I've been here since two thousand and thirteen.
I don't have any problems.
I don't have any problem with the workers, the manager and the... those women here.
It's that place, it's for women.
It's... they call it "on child dialysis", CWO.
That place is for high dialysis.
That place isn't a hotel, it's a guesthouse.
You don't call it a hotel.
It's a guesthouse lodging.
Yes.
If you come in here, it's for lodging or accommodation.
If it's something else that you are looking for, go look for a hotel in the GRA.
When you get there, people play music, smoke marijuana, womanize and roam about.
Sometimes, you will see two guys fighting, breaking bottles everywhere.
But if you stay in that place, it's a serene environment.
If he sleeps, he'll sleep well.
No one will come to knock on your door at night to steal your valuable possessions like your money or your phone.
You will not experience anything like that in that place.
Even myself, I sleep outside.
I don't sleep in my room because I feel hot sensations in my body.
If I sle-... le-..., if NEPA shuts the lights off, I'll come out here, instantly.
And then my children say "mummy, what have you gone to do outside?"
I say, "ah, mstchew, let me have a nice sleep outside."
I don't sleep in the room.
That compound is nice.
Anyone who complains about that place is lying.
That's a problem for some people.
You will not be laughed at if you come in here with a woman.
Wanting her to stay with...
They are friendly.
Is it not true?
If a couple comes in here, you will show them your wedding ring, show them something which will...
The person here... you will know that this, this man, with this woman, are husband and wife, not just friends.
That is the problem.
If you don't give them, he will go away.
One day, I was at work when a girl came with a boy, and said, "auntie, look!"
I greeted them.
Mstchew, I greeted them.
He said he wanted to stay here.
He asked about the rooms and the prices.
I told him I have one for five thousand.
Ah the uh... the dormitory is for one, one thousand.
Some dormitories go for one five.
Dormitory... some go for one eight.
The women's side, five.
Upstairs... or it's eight.
The girl said okay.
She said I should go and show them the five thousand naira room.
I went to get the key.
Saying something to that boy in English.
She didn’t know that I heard what they said.
I didn’t talk, I was looking at them.
She said it again.
She didn't speak up well enough for me to hear but since she was talking quietly, I already heard the two questions she was asking that boy.
And I told her... asked her "ah, what is she telling this boy X...?"
She said, hurry up and take the... I picked up the key to the four thousand naira room.
I picked up the key to another one which goes for five thousand.
Just as I was about to go out, taking the key with me, the girl said "uh... auntie, come, come back!"
"Look!"
"We..."
"It's this boy's fault."
"Yeah, he's her husband."
"Ah, it's a lie!"
"And if this boy is mad-... is married to her, or you are getting ready to get married, you will show me the, the evidence."
"Or tell me why I will..."
Okay, I was the first to ask them "ah, are you siblings with that girl?"
The girl demanded "why again, why am I asking? Why will I...?"
I said I'm supposed to ask.
It's be-... it's... it's my job.
I said, "why wouldn't I ask you?"
"Who is she?"
I said I asked because since she came here, I noticed that... I was looking at them closely, from uh... the leg... from the head...
They saw me.
She said, "ah, yes, it's your character."
That boy said, "auntie, don't say too much!"
They said, "ah, he's a man!"
"With... well you... well... well you... you and that girl will not sleep in the same room."
The boy asked why
The girl was like "okay, he won't sleep?"
"Uh... he's her husband!"
"Won't you let them sleep here?"
"Isn't this place a hotel?"
Her husband would like her to sleep in a hotel.
He is the husband.
If he tells her now, she will not believe it.
She doesn't... she doesn't like Catholic kids.
Uh... she mstchew, talks about it.
I don’t know what she said that day but they said he is the husband.
He won't like sleeping alone.
Hasn't he noticed the important men who stay here?
He hasn't said what exactly is on his mind.
I don’t know what's on his mind.
Is this boy your boyfriend?
I will not give you a room to sleep in.
Go and stay in another place.
In as much time as I have spent speaking with you, that boy was talking to someone on a big phone, in Igbo.
Asking them, "where are you?"
"X, I am looking for an hotel where I will lodge in Igbo."
"I've seen it, but I'm in that place they call Bethany."
I don’t know what that woman was saying in Igbo.
She said that uh... the boy that uh... I am... uh... ah, ah, ah... Upper Weeka.
So um... I don’t know the particular park he called it.
Because, see... ah, he should go and look for a hotel in GRA.
Uh... he mentioned the two hotels but I don’t know the particular place.
Hmhm.
As uh... given that I'm a strong Warri girl, being a staunch Warri chick, we like banga sauce, and starch.
Banga sauce and starch are our best foods.
Which means that any time you come to our neighborhood, if you have not seen banga sauce and starch in a clay pot, you need to go and ask yourself some questions.
So today, today, I will just tell you how to prepare your banga sauce and starch.
First and foremost, you need to get your banga [palm nuts].
Palm nut is what they call banga, you know.
It is... when you have gotten your banga ready, there are some spices which make banga sauce what it is.
And the spices, one is called irogoje, and the other is called otaiko.
Another one is called inyanyan; another one is called peletete.
And to top it all off, you will add bitterleaf to it so that when you start eating it like that, it will go down smoothly.
Okay, here's what you do!
Once you've bought your ingredients from the market... if you want to use fish, there's no problem with that.
In Warri, they like using fresh fish... catfish.
And the kind of catfish we use is not the kind that was raised in the pond.
It's the kind that was caught from the river, fresh ones.
When we've bought it and taken it home, we will use a knife to cut off the head.
Or we will put salt in into it and we will cover it.
When we do that, the fish will die on its own.
Then what will we do?
We will take out the intestines.
That's for the fish.
Now, when you get to the market and you have bought banga, otaiko, rogoje, beletere, iyanyan and bitterleaf.
All these things I just mentioned are spices.
What do you need to do?
You need to griund these spices because you won't be tossing them inside your sauce like that.
So you will take your ba-... your rogoje, otaiko and iyanyan.
You will put them into your blender.
If you don’t have a blender, put it on a grounding stone.
Then grind it.
Get it really smooth.
And then put it in a corner.
Now, another thing you will use... you will use dry pepper in this very sauce.
Because if you use any other pepper, it may not give you that smell... that aroma it's supposed to give you.
So you will use dry pepper.
Now, to get your pepper ready, you will grind your dry pepper and set it aside.
You will use seasoning cubes because these seasoning cubes we call...
Uh... I don’t want to mention any names so that you will not insist on the one I mentioned.
A seasoning cube is a seasoning cube.
Any kind of cube.
You will also use seasoning cubes while preparing this food.
So you will set your seasoning cubes aside.
You also need crayfish.
What?
But you don’t need a lot of crayfish because they can overpower the sauce.
So s-... you will just use a little crayfish.
You will grind your crayfish and set it aside.
Now, let's cook the banga sauce quickly, quickly, quickly.
What will you do?
You've already gotten your palm nuts, also known as banga, ready.
Put your banga on the flame.
Do not buy the genetically modified banga.
Buy the locally planted banga because the local banga will give you the good oil you want.
The genetically modified banga will just be thick.
And it will not make the sauce delicious.
Well, buy the native banga.
How can you identify the native banga, in case you want to know?
Just press it with your hands, like this.
Native banga doesn't have much flesh.
Once you touch it like this, it will shoot out a little, but before you will touch the genetically modified Banga in this way, it'll have already torn open and it's really fleshy.
That’s the difference between the locally grown and the genetically modified ones.
But again, there's one other method.
Because your locally grown banga doesn't thicken up quickly.
You will cook it for a very long time, but it will not get thick.
But if you want it to get thick fast, you can add some of the genetically modified Banga to the locally grown banga.
But make sure that you use more of the locally grown banga than the genetically modified one.
So now, pick up your banga and put it on the flame when I tell you to.
When you have put it on the flame, within the next thirty minutes, your banga is ready.
If you are cooking with charcoal, it'll be ready within twenty minutes because of the intensity of the fire.
Once your Banga is ready, take it off the fire just as it is and put it in a mortar.
You know that the mortar has a child [the pestle].
Yes, the mortar has a child.
Put your banga in the mortar.
Pound the banga with the child.
Pound it very well.
When you are done pounding, pour water into it and wash the banga with your hand; wash it very well.
When you are done washing it, drain the water from the banga, put it in a pot.
When you have put it into a pot, set it on your stove.
Let it boil for ten minutes.
Once it boils for ten minutes, don’t waste time at all... at all.
That pepper that your have ground, put in your pepper.
Take a little salt.
Add the salt to it.
That salt you will add, and the pepper, will make the oil in the banga flow to the top of that sauce.
Now once you have finished doing that, you will wait a little.
Add the irogoje, beletete, otaiko, and uh... inyanyan which you have ground together to the pot.
Let them boil for another ten minutes.
Afterwards, check to see if it has thickened a little, hm.
If it's not thick yet, leave it.
Then, the next thing you will do is add ground crayfish to it.
Put your salt in.
When you have added the salt, fish is the last thing you will add.
It's... take your fish... add your fish to it.
Let the fish bpil.
Then once it's done, make sure that you're careful when you stir the sauce; don’t stir it just any old way.
You will stir it slowly, so that your fish will not break into pieces.
Now, once you've added that, the next thing to add is your bitterleaf.
So get your dry bitterleaf.
Put your dry bitterleaf into it.
When you might have put your dry bitterleaf into the sauce, do not mix it with the spoon again.
Beacause if you mix it with the spoon, it will become bitter.
So put your dry bitterleaf into the sauce.
Then let it boil for five minutes.
Do not put a spoon into it.
After five minute, pick up your spoon and stir your banga sauce with it.
Then let it continue to boil.
Since you're using the locally grown banga, it will not get dry too quickly.
Now, the next thing you will do is... our local pot which we use in Warri.
They call it an ewere pot.
Wow, it reminded me of my mom and dad at home.
Okay, you see your ewere pot, you will put your ewere pot on the stove.
Heat the ewere pot for a very long time.
When it has been heated up well enough, pick up your spoon.
Take your banga sauce which is yet to thicken up in the pot.
Put it into your ewere pot.
Put the fish into it.
Heat up the sauce right inside the ewere pot for three minutes.
After three minutes, take your Ewere pot off the fire and set it on the floor.
Then the last thing is your starch.
Starch is our local food which we eat the banga sauce with.
And that starch, it's made from cassava; the cassava that garri is made with.
So that your starch... just put the starch in water.
Get your frying pan and put a little oil into it.
When you put starch... put enough water which will give you the consistency you want, so that the starch will not be too hard or be sticky.
The next thing to do is put the starch in your pot.
When you have put the starch into your frying pan, then continue to turn the starch while it's on fire.
Keep turning the starch.
It will take only ten minutes for the starch to stick together.
If the starch is ready, bring it down from the fire.
Get your banga sauce.
Then enjoy.
Okay my people, good afternoon.
I believe you're good and you're body is in top shape.
Okay, right now, at this very hour, we want to do some kinds of, you know, some quick eating and full belly issues, and uh... I will tell you some things you need to know about food.
Uh?
You know that you should not put every piece of food you see around you into your mouth.
Uh?
So sometimes, when you take a look at some food, uh... ask yourself if this food I wanna eat... if the food is good for your body or not.
Now let me ask you, "when was the last time you got yourself checked?"
I mean before you put the food into your mouth, you will first of all read about that, that food, get to know the health benefits of the food, know if the food is any good or not.
Because sometimes, you can put some food in your mouth.
And when you are done eating, you will get an upset stomach, and that's not too good for you.
So today on the program, right here and right now, I will tell you three things you need to know about food.
Number one, you know that the way you present your food... the way you serve the food to someone can determine if the food will be eaten or not.
Uh?
So when you are presenting food to someone, at least, do it with a smile.
Garnish the food with, you know, with all sorts of protein and the like, so that the food will be inviting and others will love to join you in eating it.
Because if you put inyorominyo in your food, someone may come, look at it, and won't be able to eat it.
Uhum!
That is number...
That is number one.
Okay, number two.
Did you know that the carrots you normally chop come in different colors?
They come in white, purple and even red.
In fact, sometimes, you will wonder if the one you have is a carrot or not.
It's a carrot!
It's because it's not available in Nigeria.
We only know that carrots are orange in color.
But they come in other colors besides orange.
So when you go overseas and are given a white carrot, don’t be afraid because it's a carrot too.
And you know that no matter how many carrots you eat, even if you eat them all day, from... uh... the first uh... week to the last week of the three hundred and sixty five days in a year, you cannot gain more weight.
Why?
Carrots contain no fat.
They contain zero percent fat.
Number three.
Uhum!
This third thing I want to tell you is really very important.
When I say very important kwa... I spoke a bit of Igbo there.
I'm not supposed to interject in Igbo.
But it is very, very important.
Now, you don’t ask yourself, this okra you want to cook with, what is its other name?
You don’t ask yourself that.
This okra, apart from the fact that I grate the okra and I cook with it, what can I use this okra for again?
If you have never asked yourself that question, I will tell you now before I go.
In fact, what you call okra is not really called okra.
It is called lady fingers, yes.
You might be wondering if these are the same fingers from a woman's hand.
Leave it that way!
But it's lady fingers.
So if you go abroad and you hear okra being called lady fingers, eat it because it's okra!
Then, number two.
With okra, instead of you cooking the okra, cooking it... cooking it... cooking it... cooking it... cooking it, I'll tell you really fast how you will process your okra, so that you can eat it without cooking it.
See how you will process it!
You have some stew already prepared in the house.
Okay, do you have some stew which you have already prepared?
Aha!
If you have lady fingers, which is also called okra, in the house, instead of throwing that prepared stew away, just put it on the flame, leave it to boil a little,
You know, let it simmer.
When it has boiled for some time, cut your okra into small pieces.
When you've finished cutting it, take your stew... take the fresh okra and put it in a corner of the pot of stew.
Then, what will you do?
If you have powdered fufu or if it is gari or semovita/semolina, just eat the fufu with the okra.
Then, your body will be very strong.
Good afternoon!
My name is Joy Ossai.
Thank you!
My people, what I want to tell you about now, now uh... yes, is about the ghetto life.
If you've never lived in the ghetto, wow, mstchew, you are missing out.
I say ghetto life is legit.
This is the place to be.
Because that's where you'll learn other languages, uh... you'll learn slang.
I'm telling you.
As soon as you come to where they... the street guys are mixing things together uh... mstchew, you will be amazed like you're a spoiled brat.
And the fact is that the spoilt brats can't mix with the ghet-... uh, the underprivileged.
You know that the rich ones pretend... they act like morons, they act like momma's boys.
The poor people don’t have time for that.
Those of us who are poor don’t have the time to act like momma's boys.
Who will give you the chance to act like a momma's boy?
Or do you wanna act like one in front of your dad?
Your dad will bring you back to reality.
He'll do it with a big slap.
And another thing is that as you go into a ghetto, you need to be really, really, really, really, really alert so that the street guys don’t make fun of you.
Because when they make fun of you, you'll look an moron, clueless.
It's only you and them, you'll just be clueless.
So, ghetto life... the truth about ghetto life is that you will learn a lot.
If you were brought up in the ghetto, you will learn a lot.
You'll know a lot of things.
You'll be strong.
I say you'll understand so many things.
Your buddies won't be able to play on your intelligence, other guys won't get to swindle you.
Because you will be one step ahead of them
You've already read their mind.
As he observes you, you are also observing him.
Another thing about the place is the bad lifestyles; all kinds of bad things.
You will know the difference between good and evil.
The ghetto life involves of a whole lot of things.
Everyone is struggling; you will struggle.
If you feel that you don’t have anything to eat, you will eat garri.
You will see little boys have already gulped down some garri.
He has drunk garri.
As soon as he drinks garri, he gets strength.
He will dare you who who's eaten rice; you who brags that your father gives you rice and chicken.
As a fool, he'll wake you up.
That’s no child's play.
And as I'm saying this uh... white man, you're laughing too.
That’s the proper thing to do.
You, you know it too.
Uhuh!
You're just there, watching us.
No problem!
It's true!
So in here, we have the downtown area, it's a ghetto.
If you go there right now uh... you will see all those guys who have had homemade gin.
Do you know what homemade gin is?
Yes!
A well brewed palmwine.
You will take it fresh.
But since it rained today, you go and take a look at the men.
Everyone is there, and everyone is drunk.
There's something else which, which they will take later on.
Which means that now, as you... now... which is on the way... you're educated people.
They've been watching you from a distance.
Hey, who's there?
As they watch you, who goes there? You know, you'll be afraid at first.
Yes, as privileged people you too, now it's... you the white man, who's already afraid, first you'll uh... first you'll take a look.
What are they saying?
What are...?
Shh, where are you?
Position!
Which one is...?
What are they saying?
We're not taking that.
Since you can't speak in a way they understand, they'll corner you.
Uh... first of all, what's in your pocket?
Your phone of course, that’s how they'll trick you into taking your phone.
Ah, my brother, my man, actually, I like this phone of yours.
What model is this?
You'll say it's Infinix.
Let me have a look!
As the person is looking at it, he has seen it as well.
Mstchew!
Saying, "oh man, this phone is nice!"
"Let me make a call on it."
You'll give it to him so he can make a call with it.
He will say, "oh, hello, hello, hello!"
As he walks away, your phone goes with him!
Yes, that’s it!
That’s how life is.
Your phone is gone.
And being a moron, you shout "hey, where's my phone? Where's my phone? Where's my phone?" and the next person you'll say "this person took my phone" to is a fraud, he'll tell you, "hurry up and bring some money, so I can go and get it!"
Ehe!
Since you don't know any better, you'll want to get your phone, so you'll give him some money.
And as soon as you give him some money, the money...
He will tell you, "now, let me go and call him!"
He disappears too.
That's life in the ghetto.
How did I get into the ghetto life?
Myself, I'm really stubborn.
Really stubborn.
And me, I went to a private school, but...
While we were walking through the streets of Lagos, when we're coming back and speaking English...
But when you take a look at the Mechanic Village, you'll see guys smoking marijuana.
People smoke cigarettes, taking strong drinks.
Everyone's talking.
We also want to be accepted.
Then, we will be looking at them.
Then we, we are pretending.
When we're pretending, they're calling us spoiled brats.
And that pains us.
Imagine some kid calling you a spoiled brat out of nowhere.
Sometimes when we want to play ball with them, they will tell you "shh, come on, get out of here!"
We will leave.
Mstchew!
So the thing pains me.
I say this lifestyle, I will also have a taste of it.
So from there, when we come back, just as we have come back now, mstchew, I will drop my books.
I will go with my... one small boy.
The son of the gateman who works there.
We will go there.
When we get there, he would say, "this is my friend."
As soon as he says, "he's my friend", they will say, "what is your name?"
I will tell them that my name is Uche.
We will say okay.
We will be there, talking.
From there, we will f-... head out and go to the canal to catch fish.
As we go to the canal to catch fish... sometimes, we will leave the place and go under the bridge.
When we go under the bridge, we will see...
Sometimes, the very first day I tried marijuana there, it was Ben who told that it was marijuana; they call it fish.
I was just... my friend told me, "oh man, do you wanna eat fish?"
I said yes!
He said...
I... first of all, I asked him "what kind of fish is that?"
He said, "dried fish."
I said, "bring it here."
I actually love dried fish.
So they wrapped it up and brought it to me.
When they brought it over, I looked at it.
I said, "this isn't fish!"
He said, "what else do you want? What do you think they call fish?"
"You try it."
"You have to have it because I've wrapped it already."
And that day, as I tried it uh... my head swelled up.
As I was looking around, the ground... the ground... the ground seemed seven steps higher.
And then my eyes teared up, my voice also changed.
Then I was afraid.
As I was walking, I was staggering... I was walking and I was staggering.
They said, "oh man, this guy is gonna pass out."
So they rushed to get me some garri on a plate.
I used my hands.
I didn't even wait.
I ate it fast, using my hands.
I was not satisfied.
They went out to get me some coconut water.
As soon as they got me the coconut water, I drank it.
Afterwards, I slept.
I didn’t wake up until the following morning.
And so my Aunt asked me, "eh, where were you yesterday?'
Mstchew!
I told her that no... that I went to play ball and I was feeling weak.
She said, "but when you came back, your voice was not..."
I said, "mstchew, auntie, don’t worry!"
I was having a serious headache yesterday.
She said, "are you sure?"
I said yes!
She said, "but you're alright now?"
I said, "yes, no worries!"
She, she left.
So myself, I went back there because I wanted to try that stuff again.
So I went back.
So when I got back there, I tried it.
It had the same effect on me.
I said, "no, I'm not gonna give up on this thing, I will overcome you, you won't be the one to overpower me every time."
From then on, we kept trying it for a long time and we became pros.
I started to get control over it.
As I was getting control over it, it was giving me joy in return.
It was giving me joy uh... I was enjoying it.
Mstchew!
But at a time, we realised that nothing good was coming out of the experience.
When you take the stuff, you will start misbehaving.
Doing weird things.
So I stopped taking it.
Thank God that it happened that way.
So that brought me into the ghetto.
Yes!
Absolutely!
Yes, good afternoon!
My name is Oke Lucent Akporube.
I'm a musician; I'm a drummer, I play drums and I'm very good on drums.
And the way I... how I started... how I got to the level I am now... I had a passion for music when I was a kid.
As a kid, you really don’t have a reason to go to church.
You'll go there to learn what's of interest to yo... what you like... what you have your eyes on.
Then, when we were younger, my father was attending Assembly... Assemblies of God.
So when we were in the church, the drummers... the instrumentalists made an announcement that if you want to learn how to play instruments... musical instruments, you should come learn it in the church!
So we... we went to learn.
So, you know this politics in churches... all these uh... guys were choosing... they were looking forward to teaching the ones whose parents were rich.
So they picked all the children they wanted to teach.
But me, determined at the age of four, I said I needed to play this thing by all means.
I'll go to church, I'll go to play.
They took the drumsticks from my hands, saying, "get out of here!"
"You, did your father pay?"
All those ones... I said, "okay, no problem!"
Crying... I would go home crying, come back again and they would still chase me away.
It's either they take the pedal away or they take the drumstick.
So afterwards, when I'm ready to go play, I take the pedal I made myself and the drumsticks in my pocket.
When I get to the church and they take their stick and their... the pedal, I'll take my own pedal, take my sticks and play gradually.
They would come around, listen to what I was playing and then chase me away.
I would leave the place.
So I had to go home.
The seat... my... the chairs in my house had wooden handrests, all those old school chairs, and foam you can rest your back on.
So and my floor, if you bang it, it sounds like a bass drum.
So that was where I was learning to play, with toothbrushes.
I practice, I practice, I practice, everyday.
So one day, the drummer did not come to church.
So they were looking for someone to play the drums.
As small as I was (at the age of... then, I had started playing, I was already six years old) so I sat on the drums and I played them that day.
So they were asking, "haha, whose child is that?"
My father came out proudly saying, "he's my son!"
This person came out and said, "ah, your son did well!"
So with that, I was just learning gradually, I was learning until I started going to play in different churches.
So by the time I was eight, I had started playing in the church.
I had started making money gradually.
So I don’t have the time to go telling my father that I wanted to buy this and that.
So I was assisting him.
Though, my family... then I understood the way things were, but at a stage, when I started... (in fact, what year was it? In nineteen ninety five), when I got into secondary school, I met a guy.
The guy plays drums, he plays bass, he plays everything.
I became his friend.
We were just playing.
Every time we went to his house.
Even the bass guitar, I play bass guitar.
I was... I'm really good at bass guitar too.
But when my brother started learning to play bass guitar, I had to stay off it so that he could focus on that.
Then, myself, I just focused on the drums.
So I was playing drums.
But there was a boy on my street I used to play with from time to time.
When I'm playing drums... whenever I see a place where they're playing drums, all the kids do a service.
You know that children know how to organize church services; they will just gather together and be singing, people will be playing.
So myself, I'll just go, go and be playing as if uh... I'm the best.
But this boy, we were all...
You'll never see this boy coming out to show off his skills.
I know that this boy is a wizard on the drums.
He has practiced really well.
One day, my church... (I was with Redeemed Christian Church then), so they said they needed a drummer in the headquarters.
Before I knew it, I saw this boy playing drums.
When I heard the boy playing drums, I got scared.
The boy played so well, he played better than anyone in the church.
I said uhuh, so this guy... (his name is Kevwe), I said, "so you play drums and you've been hiding your skills, no worries!"
Because of that boy, I decided to rehearse all night for two years... every night till I...
I was going to church every Monday.
I'll go by ten o clock in the night.
I will rehearse till four o clock in the morning.
Then I will come back.
As soon as I get to the house, I will just do one or two things, take care of myself.
I will go to school.
When I come back from school, I will wait a little, then I will sleep.
Then at night,I will go out for evening service.
As soon as the service is over, I will go home, and then go back to church.
Every Monday to Friday, every week (apart from Saturday and Sunday), for almost one year, that's the time I set as my target.
The next time the guy and I met... the next year, the boy realized that it was a power struggle.
He had to step down for me.
So he said they took him away from the headquarter church.
And I was made the drummer.
I said no.
It's not my style to get involved in those things, but I've been playing in the church all my life.
When I mistakenly said okay, I had a misunderstanding in my church.
I said okay, let me just get... let me go and try this secular music... let me have a taste of secular music.
So I said, okay, let me try this club.
When I tried the clubs, I played in the club for three months, at least.
In those three months, I know what I saw, where someone will smoke and blow it out on your face.
All those... and myself, I don’t like all those things.
But God Himself warned me not to go play in the club again.
How did you do it?
It's... it just happened that I got sick.
I couldn't do anything for almost two months.
So when I go to church... I went back to my church and I met with my pastor, asking him not to be offended about what happened.
So I have come back.
That same day, I had a dream.
So in the dream, I saw someone... a woman gave me tri-...
She gave me some...
I had seen the woman in a dream.
The woman gave me something and I took it.
As I was going, I didn’t know that I got sick on account of that dream.
So as the pastor was preaching, I got... but you can recall your dream and make sure you return anything you collected from anybody; I said, "now, I know!"
So I recalled the dream and I waited.
A a child, I then prayed.
That night, I had the dream
Then I saw the woman.
The woman had given me meat and she was already leaving.
So I called her back.
I said, "ma'am, come back for your thing, use it!"
I threw it to the woman and she caught it.
The next... as I woke up, I started sweating.
Afterwards, I was fine.
So since then, till I came down to Portharcourt to start playing for the church I attend now, till now, I didn't go to play in any other church.
So if it's commitment, right, if God is... if God blesses someone for what they do, ah... well, I don’t know because I am not God.
Because I receive God's blessings everyday, but I will... I will...
What I am trying to say is that music, if you don’t like music... (because personally, music is my life), if you take music away from me, then I'm finished.
So my life is all about music, and God.
So that is what I have... see... and that's the only thing I want to tell you.
My advice to anyone who is into music is that they should do what they know will make God bless them and the people who listen to them.
Thank you!
Good afternoon, people listening to me!
I want to talk to you about a man called Jesus.
You've been hearing about him, but a lot of you don’t have any relationship with him.
This person whose name is Jesus was his... the one God sent.
God is the One we worship, who can be likened to your father who brought you into the world.
As your father brought you into the world, fed you, taught you and housed you, so our God in heaven is the One who sent His own son also, whose name is Jesus, to tell us that if we come to Him, we will have to come through Jesus.
But Jesus didn’t just come that way.
According to the Bible in, in uh... John, chapter three verse three, a man named Nicodemus went to Jesus one day, and asked him, "I see the things you've been doing since you came."
You are doing so many good things in people's lives.
People's lives are getting better.
The one whose eyes are blind, his eyes will see; the one who cannot eat, you give food; the one who has no leg, you can make them walk.
I really like what you're doing.
You are good at heart.
You love people so much.
You don’t discriminate between the poor and the rich.
You carry everybody along.
I want to start doing the things you do.
Then Jesus answered him, "yes, it is very possible for you to do what I am doing but there is a condition."
Then he asked Jesus, "what is the condition for me to do what you do, enjoying this privilege, enjoying this benefit?"
So Jesus told him, "unless you are born again..." in John Chapter three, verse three.
That being born again means that unless you change your lifestyle to become like me, right, to do the... to...
"Unless you change your lifestyle and start thinking of God, unless you leave your old ways of worshipping other idols... other things, and begin worshipping the true God who is in heaven, you will not be able to do what I do."
Then Nicodemus said, "aha, how will I be born again?"
"Uh... will I go back into my mother's womb so that she can give birth to me again?"
"I am... I am eighty five years old."
"I'm old now."
"In fact, my mother is dead."
Jesus said no.
If you read the Bible... go and read verse six!
He said no.
That unless you are born of water, and of the Spirit, you will not be able to enter the Kingdom of God.
What is the Kingdom of God?
That’s the message I brought for you today.
The Kingdom of God is what God has prepared in heaven, which we're supposed to be enjoying even here on earth, before we go to Him in heaven.
In the Kingdom of God, there is no sicknesses; in the Kingdom of God, there are no diseases; in the Kingdom of God, there's no want; in the Kingdom of God, there's no poverty; in the Kingdom of God, there's only happiness, and joy.
So Jesus told Nicodemus, "unless you are born of water and of the Spirit, you cannot enter that kingdom."
What was the water Jesus was talking about?
The water means that unless you, you know the Bible, which is the word of God, then you won't understand who God is, you won't even know what God is able to do for you.
So the way to enter the Kingdom of God is to be born of that water.
Again, he used another phrase saying, "and of the Spirit."
What is the Spirit?
It means that the... in... who you really are... the body you go about in is not the real you.
Your mind is not you.
There is a real person inside you, which is the Spirit.
And he said that unless that Spirit has also changed, you cannot enter either.
What will change that Spirit?
It's the word of God.
The... and how can the Spirit get changed?
When you say let the word of God into your heart!
If you go back to Gen... uh... John's gospel, chapter one, verse one, the Bible says, "in the beginning was the word, and the word was with God, and the word was God."
So that word which the Bible was talking about is the person Jesus.
Jesus said, "I come in the volume of..." what?
The books.
So everything you read in the Bible is about Jesus.
And for you to see the Kingdom Jesus was telling Nicodemus about, you must take that word into your heart.
And what is the word we are talking about?
According to John chapter one, verse one, that word is who?
Jesus Christ.
Which means unless you accept Jesus into your life, you cannot see the Kingdom of God.
People who are now enjoying the benefits of God are living in good health, they are living in prosperity.
There is no sickness in their body, no, no lack.
God blesses them immensely.
Everything they lay their hands on prospers.
They da-...
They see the kindness of God; they are not sickly, visiting the hospital today, going down with arthritis tomorrow and having a headache the next day.
No!
Everything about their life is very good.
It's because they have accepted Jesus into their lives.
And Jesus said, "if you accept me into your life, Nicodemus, you will begin to experience the Kingdom of God."
And Nicodemus said, "is that so?"
"So, is that how it is?"
And another thing the Kingdom of God has come to do for us is that the kingdom of God... wherever the Kingdom of God is, it is light.
And wherever you have light, there is no what?
Darkness.
So the Kingdom of God is also the light of God.
When that light comes into a dark place, what happens?
Darkness will disappear.
Just remember when NEPA [National Electric Power Authority] switches off the light in your house.
When you put on your lantern, or you light your candle, what happens?
You will see everywhere.
That’s how the light of God is.
When light comes into your life, what happens?
All the things which the Devil has imposed on your body, all the disgusting things, the light of God will make all of them what?
Disappear.
So the vital message for today is that the Kingdom of God, like Jesus said, is near you, but how can you access it?
How will you enter into that kingdom?
Until you receive Jesus into your life...
My brother, my sister, as many of you listening to me, if Jesus has not come into your life, your life will still be in crisis.
Your life... you will still be having pains and problems here and there.
But when Jesus has come in and has taken a seat, and you say, "Jesus, you are my Lord; from today, I will do whatever you say."
Then from that day, you will begin to experience the glory of God in your life.
You will begin to see what it means to live in the Kingdom of God.
God bless you as you accept him into your life!
In Jesus' name, amen!
They take sports very seriously, very important, and they want Nigerians to uh... watch the matches.
Alright, as it is, the NNL [Nigeria National League] has bad news for us this morning because uh... we heard that the bus carrying NNL, Nigeria National League side, Osun United... hey, it was attacked by armed robbers... hey, they were attacked at night when they were leaving uh... Calabar for the venue of yesterday's match.
As gathered, it was along the Ore - Ondo - Akure express way.
So these men who were operating in the middle of the night attacked this team.
It was reported that they beat the players and their coach, they even cut uh... butchered the head of the driver with cutlass.
According to the story we got this morning from Osun United's spokesperson, Tunde Samshudeen, he said the bus driver is in critical condition.
He said he's in the emergency unit uh... in the General Hospital in Ondo town.
Most of the players were said to have sustained different degrees of injury from the attack, including the goalkeeper.
Ayo Ojo and Olabisi Olagunju said their bodies were mutilated by these armed robbers in the attack.
Yes, it was reported that Osun United's coach, Rier Duke Udi, was beaten mercilessly in the attack.
The Omoluabi guys, as they are being called, travelled in a thirty two seater bus on their way out of Calabar after they played with you-... uh, uh... Unicem Rovers in U.J Esuene Stadium.
They lost two - zero, but they said their car had a minor problem.
That’s why their journey was delayed.
So the night fell on them while they were still in Ondo.
Then these p-... bad people... these bad people doing evil things at night came into the scene.
Hey!
May Father God help these people, so that they get well very soon because uh... as it is currently, they need to continue with their job which is...
Now football... alright, before we take our leave this morning, let me confirm that presently, Real Madrid players are really happy.
Why?
Their president, Florentino Pieres, has confirmed that because they did well, they won... they won the Super Europa... the Super League, they won the FIFA Club World Cup, they won La Liga, and they won the Champions' League; he said he will hit each of them two million pounds.
Wow, so much money!
Oh, on top of this money story, I have another story for you this morning which involves money.
Manchester United... oh, this football club!
Now, I know news club.
Yes, as it is, they are the richest club in the whole world because they are in the top position.
They made three point two seven billion dollars just this year.
Wow, so much money in Manchester United!
This is where we draw the curtains this morning.
We’ll bring you more stories tommorow morning.
Meaning that, you'll get to hear everything happening in the world of sports.
Most importantly, my name is Triple A.
Please, help me tell someone close to you and those ones who are far away that nobody should get lost and no one should fight any time.
God is in charge.
He blesses your heart!
My name is Dondeli Obi, and uh... I am from Onitsha Ukwuani in Ndokwa West Local Government Area of Delta State, here in Nigeria.
I had my primary education in Aido Primary School, Onitsha Ukwuani, before I moved on to have my secondary school education in Mixed Secondary School, Onitsha Ukwuani.
When I finished with secondary school, I moved on to the Federal Polytechnic Auchi to study Electrical Electronics Engineering.
But now, I'm working with uh... Wazobia FM in Abuja.
We speak uh... Pidgin on our radio programmes in the station.
And uh... though I chose to study Engineering in school, people will be asking, "ah, why are you in a radio house, or in broadcasting?"
But uh... it's a question of talent, and your abilities are different from your training.
So I love to do uh... broadcasting.
It has nothing to do with what I studied in school or what I'm studying at the moment, but it's what I like to do; what I'm talented in.
That’s what makes me do it.
And I love the job with all my heart.
I love the job.
I'm happy that I'm doing this job.
In fact, when I'm going to work, I don’t prepare as if I'm going to work.
I prepare as if I want to go and enjoy myself.
Like I want to go and play because I see the job as a part of me, it flows from inside me.
I don’t struggle to do it, it's really very easy for me to do.
So... but I still hope to further my education because uh... I feel that you have so many things to do in life, and uh... I still believe that education will help me a lot.
But anyways, I didn't learn the Pidgin English I speak from anywhere in particular.
I don't... I didn’t go to any particular place for the purpose of being taught Pidgin English.
I learned Pidgin English from people around me, from my day to day activities... the things I do everyday, I picked it from the way people I mix with speak it.
I don't have any choice but to go along with them so I can also communicate with them.
So I learned Pidgin English and found out that naturally, in Delta State, the South-South area of Nigeria, Pidgin English is one of the languages everybody speaks.
If you want to know the general language which everybody understands in the whole South-South area, it is Pidgin English.
It was easy for me to learn it when I was there because that’s the language everybody speaks.
It's generally accepted.
So I didn’t go to any Pidgin school.
Nobody called or sat me down saying uh... "this is the classroom."
"Now sit down, let me teach you how to speak Pidgin!"
But today, I speak Pidgin more than any other language, even my own language.
I speak Pidgin more, more than I speak that language.
So Pidgin is not something you will to learn in schools, or something like that.
It's ingrained.
As soon as you were born and you are growing up, mixing with people, it comes to you naturally.
And uh... as a yound man, I s-... I know that I have so many opportunities waiting for me and I have uh... many ambitions for my career, and also for my country.
You know, working as a broadcast journalist, which I do now, I have seen sa-... I've... it's exposed me to so many things.
And I see things from different angles now.
Both the way things happen in our society, or politics, and every other part of life in our country.
And myself, I know that I can also do my part to make society and our country a better place.
I'm planning to go into politics as well.
I'll go into politics soon because I found out that if I have the plans, the ambitions, and uh... the opportunity doesn’t come, I won't be able to play my part.
So I feel that if I go into politics, by God's grace, I will be able to play my part to bring development to our country, Nigeria, because the way things are in Nigeria, truth be told... let's be honest, things are not working.
And why things are not working is what we're trying to find out so we can figure out the best solution to solve everything that’s not working in Nigeria.
So for me, as a young man who's just coming up, I'm watching things play out, how things are happening in our country, how our current leaders are getting things done.
I'm making efforts to find out, to know how they're getting things done, noting their mistakes, what they... the things they're supposed to do which they're not doing, the things they're not supposed to do which they are doing.
I'm watching everything going on, and I'm also following up with the things which they are planning to do.
So for me, I'll have an advantage over the current leaders because I don’t believe that the current leaders got into politics early enough.
This leadership uh... thing, then at... I'm not sure they started early.
If they had started earlier, they would have sat down to study what past leaders did.
They would have avoided their mistakes.
But what we have in Nigeria today is that this leadership will come and they will lead Nigeria.
When their time is up, they will leave.
The next one will come, they will carry on from where the last one stopped.
They will carry on from there.
But the same mistakes that the b-... b-... other leaders made while in power, is what the new ones will also make when they come in.
So that means that when the other leaders were... when they were not yet in power, they were not watching how the leaders of the day were running their own government.
They don’t take note of all the mistakes they were making.
And they don’t even have plans, no agenda stating that when I come into office, here are the things I will do.
Now when they have finally come into power, that’s when they will sit down to think about what they will do.
And if you walk a-... take a look at it closely, it will look like mtschew, they are... they're confused.
They don’t know what to do.
Why?
Because before they got into power, they did not have plans.
They got into power and then start looking for plans.
So they will be there, looking for plans.
By the time they've found a plan, their time is up.
Another person will come in.
The person coming in will also start looking for plans, he will begin working on the mistakes the other person had made, he will continue making the same mistakes.
Then uh... their term will come to an end and another person will come in.
So now we need people who are knowledgeable; people who are exposed; people who know history.
Both the things which have happened and the solution they have prepared, telling Nigerians that, "this is our problem".
"This particular thing is our problem."
This is what we'll do to solve this problem in our country, Nigeria, so that Nigeria will move forward, beyond where it is right now.
So for me, right, that ambition is alive and uh... with God, I believe that it will come true.
Um... for me, to move Nigeria forward, we need to understand ourselves.
Um... so many things are dividing us as Nigerians.
And we will not be able to move forward until we get united, when we work hand in hand and come together.
What I'm I trying to say is that when an Igbo man will not see himself just as an Igbo man; when a Yoruba man will not see himself only as a Yoruba man; where a Hausa man will not see himself as a Hausa man; when an Itsekiri man will not see himself as an Itsekiri man; when someone from Rivers State will not see himself as h-... someone from Rivers State.
Let everyone see themselves first as a Nigerian, before making reference to their tribes.
Until we get to that level, moving ahead will be difficult.
Because how will you...?
You'll hear young people from a certain area saying, "no, you are... you're not from our tribe, so you need to leave this area."
It doesn’t make sense.
Because if you look around, there's nowhere in this country where you have people of one tribe only.
Do you want to talk about Lagos?
Or is it Abuja?
You will see people of all tribes in these states.
If you go to Enugu, it's the same thing; if you go to Lagos it's the same thing; if you go to Rivers State, it's the same thing; or in Calabar, it's the same thing.
What binds us together is this country.
And we're in the country together, right from Imo River.
Until we're able to take the dirt away from us...
And just a few people whose selfish interests make them ruin the process; they just don’t want the people to make progress.
And... but the funny thing is that social media has opened the eyes of so many people.
Some may get enlightened in a good way while others may get enlightened in a bad way.
Because these people with selfish interests also understand that if they don’t keep up with social media, they say that all the people who are under their control will be lost.
So they come onto social media for their campaigns.
You will notice on Whatsapp,
Someone will just...
They'll write a stupid post, spread it, make everyone hear about it.
People reading it will not take time to confirm it.
They'll just read it at face value, start spreading it all around as uh... rumor mongers that we have now, they will start uh... sh-... uh... sharing it from one person to the other, planting the seeds of evil in the minds of uh... different people.
Before you know what is happening, someone will start developing hatred for a fellow human being who happens to be from another tribe.
What for?
Because they're not from the same tribe.
But for us to move ahead, the youth will have to understand that when they come and say if an election comes up, take this, go vote for me, disorganize things, and steal ballot boxes... until we realize that we are mortgaging... (when I say mortgage, that's not clear), we are selling our future.
We need to understand that the future is now, not tomorrow.
All those things they're telling us about the future... the youth are the leaders of tomorrow, no!
The youth are the leaders of today.
Not tomorrow.
Take France for example!
Or what country should I mention?
Very young people are getting into seats of power.
The old people should start serving as advisers while the young people are working.
Yes, we know that we need the elderly because they have seen it all, and people do say that you can't claim to be experienced in something you have not experienced.
They can advise while the young people are working.
That’s the only way we can move forward.
Well, the issue of uh... restructuring and... where some people are saying that some others are outsiders in their communities, they're not supposed to be there.
If you check, some of the biggest investments in some areas...
Let me draw examples from Kogi State where I had my secondary school education, Eda, to be precise.
At that time, one of their biggest boutiques where they sell clothes and other things people wear, was owned by someone from the Igboland.
It was not owned by someone from that tribe.
Until we understand that yes, whatever is in our vicinity is ours!
But we cannot do everything together.
Take a look at the motor cars, the whole process of manufacturing was not done by the company who assembled it.
It must work with other people in order to complete all the necessary things.
The electrics, the mechanics, the oil.
They can't be producing the oil they use but they will meet and partner with the ones producing oil, so that they can work together.
Take farming as an example.
If a farmer plants uh... cassava and the cassava grows and he digs it up, will he carry it on his head when going to the market?
He will get in a car.
It may be that the car is not his own.
Someone else drives the car.
It may so happen that the driver is not from his tribe.
Until we understand all these little things, that when we get connected in little ways, we eventually achieve what we find.
We can't just be, be, just be... be pretending that okay, we will do it; we will make it ours.
No island...
I mean, no man is an island.
You need your brother as much as you need your sister; and likewise, you need your mother and your father to move on.
So all those verbal attacks of calling others strangers, strangers, are lies.
Who is the richest man in Africa now?
Is he not a Northerner?
We know that all the...
There are so many other wealthy people around, but they don’t publicize it.
Until we decide that yes, this person... if we have noticed that they can help us develop our land, then we should accept them, they help develop the land and we benefit from it.
They themselves will benefit from the venture.
So many investments by the investors.
Take Dangote, the richest man in Africa, as an example.
Is he not planning to build a refinery in Lagos?
Did he think of his homeland?
Are most companies not in Lagos?
Because he has discovered that the necessary capacities are not available over there.
Nearness to raw materials may be the reason for building it over there.
He can't say that okay, because uh... you are rich, you will build a refinery in the desert, right?
How do you access the oil?
You will go to the people who own oil reserves, talk to them, enter into agreement with them, and then move forward.
But due to the events of the past, so many people felt that oh, because uh... some people want to take over the resources on their lands, they refuse to dialogue with them or compensate them.
Even if they put it on paper, they don’t put it in...
Some of the people who go to represent them will fail to speak out in favour of their people, instead, they pocket some money and keep quiet.
They will say, "ah, mstchew, he has done his best."
The keep their mouths shut.
So these are the things we need to do.
Reorientation.
Start teaching the people so they understand... until we reorientate all the youth.
Talk to them saying, "this is it... this is it."
Really make them understand.
Not that they will be brainwashed.
Tell them the honest truth.
Then, we will move forward.
All the talk about strangers will be pushed aside and they will allocate what is supposed to be for Mister A to Mister A.
What is supposed to be for Mister B will be given to Mister B.
And not steal what belongs to Mister B for Mister C.
It doesn't work that way.
This one has...
Okay, quick, you should remember that 'body matters' [Body Talks] is what we bring your way every Wednesday.
We've turned over to uh... 'body matters'.
Now, that's the topic we want to talk about.
Then at twelve o clock, remember that, by the grace of God, Dr Sam, a gyneacologist, will join us in the studio.
Also remember that at one pm, Isaac Onoja, a pharmacist, will also join us in the studio.
Maybe we can talk about anger again, or maybe not.
But we have a lot of things to talk about, concerning you and I.
Because they say knowlegde is power, and it also delivers.
It's really very important.
I remember those of you out there who say diseases don’t kill black men.
Or maybe sometimes... (hold on... hold on...), you don't go in for check-ups, start going now.
Because a lot of our people are dying due to ignorance.
But we need to be doing the right thing.
That's why you'll see people posting things about the body in the newspapers, magazines, televisions, radios, and even flyers on uh... uh... on social media, so that you can learn.
But one thing I myself will beg of you is that not every story on 'body matters' is something you should read.
Because nowadays, some people will be... have been claiming to be doctors.
The certified doctor doesn't even talk about the thing, but he already has something like a write-up.
Something like, if you mix this and this, it will do your body good.
If you take this or you have taken that, or you do this or that... please, please, please see the professionals so that they can tell you what's up.
Yes!
Okay, quickly, you should remember that we have limited time on the topic we want to talk about.
We'll manage our time on the 'body matters' topic that is coming up.
There are so many things that you... you have heard from your friends, or that you... you read... read on the social media.
They tell you that if you take this, it will do your body good.
Tell me most of the things you have heard.
At the end of the day, all these stories are fake, fake, fake.
Now you can add this issue I just told you.
One of our callers called us here.
These women... the woman picked up her child.
The two of them were in the hospital... in the ward.
Their children were on admission.
Now, one of the women in that hospital told the other woman, "ma'am, oh, it's a shame; what's wrong with your child?"
The woman tells her that the child was suffering from this and that.
Now, imagine the other woman telling her, "ah, if my kid comes down with this, here's what I give him!"
And then this woman in the hospital went out to buy that drug outside, and she gave it to her child who was already on admission.
Then before you know it, the child dies.
When the doctors started probing into what actually happened, they found out what the mother gave her child.
"Ma'am, what happened?"
She said such and such woman told her about the drug.
I think the woman was even there.
She was the one who asked her to go and buy this thing.
Saying it would be good for her child.
Your child is in the hospital.
On admission.
Then you ran out.
You were the one to go out and buy the child what will be good for them because you think you know everything.
So many of you must have heard different stories like "you take this; take that; it works", but at the end of the day, your body system got messed up.
Alright, good afternoon!
My name is Jemaimah Efangha of Wazobia Max TV, UHF fifty seven.
Today is the wonderful day number seven in the month of June, twenty seventeen.
It's time for our quick stories.
Alright, the House of Representatives has publicly advised the Federal Government to try to conduct some investigations into the prices of cement in our country, as it is becoming too high.
This decision followed a motion put forward by the Honorable Abubakar Yunusa as he exclaimed that the rising price of different brands of cement in our country without considering the negative implications it will have on the building industry does not look good.
He came out to express concern, saying that there's nothing they are supposed to...
They should try to address the situation because of the common man who does not have much money.
As he came outside, he said that if they do not investigate this issue thoroughly, it will be very difficult for a common Nigerian to build his own house in the country.
So he came out to advise the Federal Ministry of Industry, Trade and Investment to join hands with the Cement Manufacturers Association of Nigeria and other similar organizations.
They should all invesigate this matter thoroughly.
Alright, troops from the joint task force known as Operation Delta Safe have killed at least two kidnappers in an exchange of fire, at the place where they kidnapped a victim in Rivers State.
As they were telling people the story in O.D.S. headquaters today in Yenagua, Bayelsa State, the Commander of the group, Rear Admiral Sulaiman Apochi, said these soldiers would have killed the kidnappers during an operation in Omoku Forest.
Apochi publicly said the people they have already rescued have started receiving appropriate treatment in an undisclosed hospital in Port Harcourt, Rivers State.
Meanwhile, three of the people who have come out... been exposed as having had a hand in the bomb attack on one of uh... the buildings belonging to the international oil community which is in Tedida Oginmbiri [Ogboinbiri-Tebidaba] Brass pipeline.
But meanwhile, these three people who were brought out have started confessing that they used dynamite to destroy the house of... a place outside the community in the Southern Ijaw Local Government Area of Bayelsa State.
Alright, let's take you into the African stories.
The Mozambique government has banned the importation of birds and anything related to birds (saying they've had enough... they've had enough) from the neighboring countries except the ones they said they did not know, but this has to do with Zimbabwe.
According to the report in Maputo, this announcement follows an outbreak of Avian Flu as announed last week
In a commercial poultry farm in Zimbabwe's Mashonaland East Area, it was reported that this led to the slaughter...
So many birds were slaughtered.
And the number of birds slaughtered in the area was seven hundred and fifteen.
Meanwhile, so many different reports have been coming out about this Avian Flu and it was reported that... one of the reports said it was discovered in Mashonaland um... uh... East Area, where it has been said that the report has become the most devastating.
Zimbabwe's neighbour, Botswana, has made an announcement concerning their own area.
The report concerns a similar thing, which happened to them just yesterday.
And in world affairs, very quickly, two attacks were reported in the Iranian Parliament.
And even the Ayatollah... uh... X... eh... X said that concerning this one, it was inside the Capital Tehran that at least twelve people have been killed and many people were injured in that area.
The ISIS attack reportedly happened in the parliament building.
As it appears that over this one... when it happened... earlier reports of this type of hostage situation which happens in that area... (one suicide bomber, according to the report), was said to have died in this incident.
But meanwhile, Iranian officials said they have stopped the third possible attack that was supposed to take place.
The Islamic State Group has claimed that they carried out the attack
But they said this would be the first one in Iran.
Alright, in entertainment news, country star, Senyatuwe, will play live in the UK.
For the first time in thirteen years, on BBC Radio Two's Festival in a Day in the Hyde Park, the singer was saying that the songs he had sung included "You are still the one" and even "That don't impress me much."
And he says he will become the special guest of honor in the event which will come up on the tenth day of September.
Alright, very quickly in the last story on sports matters, Bafana Bafana's Head Coach, S. Will Baxter, has come out to say that he will put in more effort.
Of all the things which will come up ahead of their all international African Cup of Nations' qualifier's clash against our nation Nigeria, the former Kaiser Chiefs and Supersports United Coach, said South Africa's preparation can be likened to a puma getting ready to go deliver a baby in the delivery room.
He said their trip to Nigeria is not goint to be a waste.
It's a lie... it's a lie!
Why?
Bafana Bafana is truly ready to play against the Super Eagles on Saturday, June tenth, in the Godswill Akpabio's International Stadium in Uyo.
Okay now, my name is Jemaimah Efangha.
For all of you watching us live in here, do have a beautiful day!
Good afternoon!
Okay.
Uh... first and foremost, right, I was born in Abuja.
I was born In Wuse General Hospital.
And that was like... that, that was like... around uh... nineteen ninety, yes.
And since then, I have been in Abuja.
I did...
I had all my education in Abuja, from primary school to secondary school up to university.
Personally, I don't like travelling.
I don't like being on the road.
Uh... but flying... I'm scared of heights.
I'm scared.
If I climb on anything high, I get really scared.
But if I get into an airplane, it used to be fun.
So it looked as if I liked that kind of thing.
But I've been staying in Abuja forever.
So even S-... uh... for my Youth Service program, I did that as well.
Uh... we don't really speak Pidgin English in my house.
Actually, we don't speak Pidgin English that much.
Uh... my mom and dad and everyone... English or... we speak our native language which is... which is Wepawanu.
Because we are from Edo State, Etsako East Local Government, uh... I-... Iyukui, close to Aginnigbode.
People who travel know the road.
Aginnigbode is more popular, you know.
So those kinds of things.
Bu-... bu-... we don’t really speak Pidgin English.
Funny enough, I speak Pidgin English more than any other person in my house.
And that's, that's because I joined Wazobia.
In fact, when I joined uh... I could speak English more than the others here in Wazobia.
But later, I had to find a way of blending in.
Uh... I studied history in school.
So, it wasn't journalism I studied.
But later, I started reading up on it.
And I was taking other courses related to journalism.
But since I studied history... it's a common saying that history is the mother of all courses.
So that one... it's easy to blend history with other courses.
So that's why it was easy for me to go with the flow.
Then, research is something I like.
So most times, I like to read on so many things, places, people, events and things.
So it is... it's really helpful.
And about this job, well, it... it's really fun.
When you come across some vocabularies in English, you will try to translate it into what people who speak Pidgin will understand.
Actually, that's the hardest part when we are trying to explain something very important.
But you'll try to make people who don't know much about it understand and not misinterpret it.
Just like English where one word can mean five different things.
For instance, we were talking about 'Theater' today.
We have 'Theater of War' for those in the military; 'Theater' where they watch movies; 'Theater' where they act.
Uh... we will even talk about the 'Gallery'.
A gallery is an upper floor in a building where people can look down.
Yes, a gallery is a place where someone can look at pictures.
Yes, so just like that, words have different meanings in Pidgin English.
You can say, "uhuh?"
"Uhuh, uhuh!"
And it's the same 'uhuh'.
But that 'uhuh' means different things, depending on how you use it.
So all those things are what you'll look into.
Then also, uh... speaking of the working hours, this is a child friendly hour.
It's the office hour.
So there are some things you can't say on air around this time.
But there are some sensitive topics someone would like to talk about.
But you have to be mindful of the time you're talking about it, and what people want to hear from that topic.
Then there are some words you... you will need to come up with words because just like you coin words in English, when you can uh... pick one word and use it the way you can.
They say everyone is their own...
Uh... you're the creator of your own English, right, but in Pidgin, if you create a word, you have to be very careful because there's a limit to how you can use it.
Before you know it, someone will start using it.
People will start using it in scripts.
Before you know it, that word which you think will... is not acceptable may later turn into something else.
So uh... that's it and uh... since Wazobia can be referred to as the people's station, most popular station in Nigeria (and not just Nigeria, even here in the North), right, people... people listen to us a lot.
So some, some words we coined have turned to lingo in the streets, everybody uses them now.
So all those things are inclusive.
Yeah, but in Pidgin English, the version we speak here in Abuja is different from the one you'll hear in Port Harcourt, the one you'll hear in the western areas.
Like most versions of Pidgin English here in Abuja, you will hear most of the things which...
For instance, if someone wants to use exclamation words, you want to like... what you'll say is "kai!"
But that's... that's a Hausa word because we're in Abuja, yeah.
But in other places, they can use maybe Yoruba words, or they infuse some Igbo words to make it exciting.
That’s how we speak it here.
Yes, I do travel.
I won't say I travel the most.
I don’t like the road.
Ah, we don’t have an airport which will lead to my village directly.
Even from, from Garki to Gwagwalada also, I'll sleep the whole way, not to mention Abuja to Benin, I mean... or Edo State.
So... but I do travel, like once in a while.
For instance every year, at least... I try to, at least, once I get to... I get to my state, I spend something like two weeks... three weeks before I X leave.
Well, they...
Okay, myself, I'm... I'm someone who likes to get into lots of things because I don’t believe you're supposed to just uh... be on just one thing in life.
There's a saying that the average billionaire has more than five jobs.
And myself, I'm still young.
So if the average billionaire has five jobs, then I wanna have six or seven jobs.
It'll be good to have seven or eight.
So I won’t be average, you know.
So it'll be good to get involved in lots of things.
But I've been into entertainment for a long time.
Even though I've been involved in the arts.
Actually, I wanted to study fine arts.
But because I was sluggish that particular year.
Later, from there, I went into the commercial class.
I had wanted to be an accountant.
But mstchew, that did not work out.
So I'm a historian.
But all these things revolve around what has been going on since my secondary school to the university, to becoming an MC, master of ceremony, and a comedian.
All those ones are also included.
But I realized that all these things are pushing me towards my destination.
So at the end of the day, artist management... talent management... they are things I enjoy.
Event consulting and management and also event planning, those are things I also enjoy.
I also enjoy editing, I al-... also enjoy movies.
I'm someone who really loves watching movies.
There's no movie I don’t like watching.
And I like talking about it.
So I'm good.
Anything that revolves around entertainment is something I like getting involved in.
From inst-... from fashion to music, to dance, comedy... as long as it's entertainment, I'm supposed to be involved.
That’s what I believe.
So I must be involved.
Then, I also love to talk.
I don’t like talking for no reason.
Everyone has a purpose in life.
And I try to make sure that anything I pull out from... whatever comes out of my mouth must impact someone.
There's a saying that there's something useful in a seemingly useless thing.
It is said that there is sense in all nonsense.
I like making more sense than nonsense.
So at least, if someone listens to you once, the impression they will have of you... because they say a first impression lasts forever, so I like to make sure that my first impression is a good one.
If you remember, there has been an issue on the ground which has been talked about.
Yeah.
Last week, we heard some news that I don't really understand.
It seems like they are considering hiking the fuel price by five naira.
Well, it's not just fuel.
Fuel and diesel.
The people have started complaining about the scarcity of food, yet you want to raise prices!
It's... I said you should take it easy!
I know that was uh... in the past week that I started saying that people should take it easy...
That one... that one, it happened on Friday.
I know you don't really trust me.
Beause you've started thinking, "what are you saying, Titi? They want to increase the price by five naira and you are telling us to take it easy".
Now, I'll tell you why I've been asking you to take things easy since last Friday.
The reason is that I trust the government of the state I live in.
That is the first reason.
I trust the government of the people I voted for to represent me.
That is the second reason.
What about the Federal Government?
I trust them too.
That is at the Federal level.
Now you understand that from Federal to State, to Local Government, Ward level and the like, I trust them.
You know I know they can't go beyond what they've been mandated to do.
You have an idea of the level, based on who you are.
Someone said, "shut up Titi, you are a smooth talker!"
Seriously, I trust them.
I trust that no matter how bad it is, they will consider us in whatever decision they want to make.
You understand?
Yes, because we are all in this together... we are in this together.
You understand, the difference between me and the guy who is in charge on the other side, is that myself, I buy one mudu [measure] of Garri while he buys one bag.
There is no difference in price at the market.
The same price is applicable to both the poor and the rich.
The difference is that I buy in a smaller quantity and the rich guys... they buy in bags, trailers, loads and the like.
You get it?
But, that doesn't mean that a bag of rice for the poor is different from a bag of rice for the rich man.
No!
The price is the same.
So they will consider us in anything they want to do.
So that's why I was telling you on Friday that you should trust them to think about the matter, and they will not just make any decision.
And I was happy this morning when I woke up and realized they didn't make a rash decision.
I told you!
Believe whatever I tell you, even if I say the rain will fall in the dry season!
Believe it!
Do you know what I saw?
Why will I believe the unbelievable?
But, but you know... let's be serious here... let's be serious here.
Jokes aside!
So based on that information which filtered out on Friday, I'll tell you the story as it's supposed to be.
You understand, because the news didn’t get to us the way it's supposed to.
By the time the story got to us, it was distorted.
They put salt on it, they put pepper, they added so many things!
This is a ploy to make the story sell.
But here's the deal.
According to the Chairman of the Senate Committee on Works, Kabir Gaya, representing the APC [All Progressives Congress] in Kano, the way he spoke about the matter, it's obvious that you shouldn't act on a one-sided story.
If you pass judgement based on what you heard from one side of the story, then you are not a good judge.
You need to listen to all sides of the story before you make up your mind.
But right now, the story... it differs.
Because according to Mr Kabiru Gaya, he says that, that it's true they had a talk on some bills under consideration, concerning, concerning the roads.
But that they did not say that the five... you and I will part with five naira.
So the next time you drive your car to the filling station for fuel... it's not like the five naira will come from you directly.
The five naira tax is an arrangement that has been on ground, long before now.
You and I were not aware of it.
You understand?
So according to what should be, based on the arrangement of road fund bills which is being proposed, which the Committee has said, "okay, you should th-... think about this issue, look into it, you understand, it's different from what the people heard."
You understand the main... the main thing is that people like us bring in the oil.
You know that we take it raw... crude, just as it comes from the ground.
We do remove it, right?
Then they dust the body, clean it up, and bring it back following what me and you can buy.
You understand?
Yes, it's not the crude that's being sold to us.
The crude is exported and refined until it's ready for use.
And yes, it has been brought back and it's being sold as petrol, they spe-... sell kerosine, diesel, gas and other products.
So what the Committee on Works proposed was that when the refined product is brought in, those who bring it in, those who sell it... so if the pump price in the filling station is one hundred and forty five naira... they're not trying to say that the pump price will move up from one forty five naira to one fifty naira.
No!
They're saying that from that one forty five naira, they will get the five naira they need for the proposed road fund.
Yes, you got it!
Now, the picture is clearer, right?
Now to the point where the story went amiss, where things got confused.
You know that you know us by now.
It didn't start today, it's been on for a long time.
We're waiting for the one who will make the announcement so that we will take out our anger on them.
Do you understand?
When the Senate Committee on Works was deliberating on the matter, an association heard about it and got upset.
The name of the association is Conference of Nigerian Political Parties, also known as CNPP.
Then they said uh... they're here again, they've started again, let's make our voice heard!
So they... zuga zugi zugi.
Ka zuga for Africa!
So they joined hands with the organized uh... labor congress.
They urged the people to join them in protest!
We've heard some fresh news, you know.
That they want to raise the pump price by five naira.
So they also got upset.
Before we knew it, the Association of Students also joined in the protest saying please, please, please, the Labour Congress members are angry already.
The students also expressed their anger.
That was how the story got to us, kata giti kata.
And so I also said, "uh... they want to increase the pump price of fuel."
Alright now, let's get these things straight.
Now, the association of the CNPP [Conference of Nigerian Political Parties] accused the Speaker of the National Assembly saying that the Senators don’t consider us before they take decisions.
That they do nothing but play with their electronic gadgets like computers, phones and the like while making decisions.
That they don't really think about the masses, you know, and their welfare.
But from all these things I've told you, in order to clear the air concerning the news we heard on Friday... the initial story we heard on Friday is that uh... the Senate wants to raise the pump price... they want to raise it by five naira.
But right now, this same Senate, through the repre-... their representative who is the Chairman of the Senate Committee for Works has spoken.
Yes, Mr Gaya, he's saying no, it's not so!
This bill, this arrangement, this road fund bill, and the like, had been on the ground.
It's been a long time.
But all the associations that ought to pay the said amount had not been paying.
Do you now understand where the misunderstanding came from?
Uhuh, because since the refined products are being brought into the country, they're supposed uh... as they sell to us, we, the country people who buy kerosine, fuel, diesel, and the like... gas for cooking, and the like, those who drive cars, use generators... as they sell to us, they ought to pay the five naira from their proceeds.
So the five naira on each litre has not been paid for a very long time.
Whose pockets does it go into?
That's the next question I want to ask.
Please, if they know, let them tell us.
So if that five naira per litre is not being paid, then, what happened to it?
Because the five naira is very important.
Last week, uh... on Saturday, I found a hundred naira note in my pocket while checking.
That hundred naira changed my life.
My life improved because of the hundred naira.
And how many five naira will you get from a hundred naira?
Just twenty.
So, do you know how, how many five naira notes have been unaccounted for?
That is for the EFCC [Economic and Financial Crimes Commission], and other agencies and the SS [State Security] officers.
You know we really love them.
Alright, back to the matter.
Based on the calculation on the ground, they said it would be as much as one hundred and sixty seven billion naira.
Do you know how rich we would have been, if we had been doing a thrift contribution of five, five naira?
Yes, for... yes!
Maybe my father would have started the contribution before I was born.
You understand?
Do you how much we would have gathered by now?
So based on the above, I leave the matter for your consideration.
What do you think?
Alright, I got the New Telegraph this morning, and I'll read out some of the stories uh... which are different.
Ah, did you hear that TELCOS is losing a lot of money?
They said they are...
The loss or the, the, the loss they have suffered has hit one hundred, and fifty six point six bilion naira.
You know you have to stumble on some of the money (be-... be-... be-... billion...), because we don’t know if it's a gazillion.
In our lifetime, we'll talk about gazillions.
Hehe.
Alright, you'll see this ex-soldier.
What's he saying?
He is a confirmed kidnapper, he said, "I only kidnap valuable ladies", says the ex-soldier.
This is one of those times you won't want anyone to describe you as valuable.
Beacause if it's about your value, they should take away Luchin this morning.
Luchi is looking valuable, hehe.
Alright, that one is in uh... page thirty four of the New Telegraph this morning.
Wike has sued the IGP, the EFCC, and the DSS over the way they are... they're planning his residence invasion.
That means that the, the way they entered, you know, Ho-... Hollywood style.
It'll be like... it's like spies coming into your house when you don’t know what's going on.
They said the guy will sue them for that operation.
It's in page six of the New Telegram.
The Court stops the House of Representatives from prosecuting Anyim.
Why do they want to prosecute him?
The man has taken the case to the High Court.
What has the the High Court done?
Protected him and said no!
I'm warning you... don't try it... don’t try it.
That's it.
Alright, that story is on page thirty five, because Luchi is about to advocate for the people.
Hehe, yes, we've all heard.
They asked, "how long will our President stay away?"
All those things are there in the paper.
Tears of joy as eighty two Chibok girls return.
Oh, great!
Government to parents: keep hope alive!
Yes, it was said that one hundred and thirteen others... they said they will be released.
That means that only one hundred and thirteen girls are still in their custody.
Yes, that one, we, we, we, we...
They are... they are... they are very...
I'm very happy.
The Red Cross says, "we are a neutral intermediary."
That means that they themselves were involved in the negotiations.
On a neutral level, according to them.
All of that's in uh... the New Telegraph.
Well, anyway, they said Adeyinka Adebayo will be buried on May twentieth.
That was announced by his family.
Stop the Police from searching my house, Wike has told the court.
Maybe... what are you hiding, sir, that you don't want them to see?
Ehen!
Falomo School.
Lagos may charge pupils with attempted rape.
I really, really, really want to commend the woman who did d-... this.
Did you know that when you see secondary school students when they are done writing their last paper, they will start acting like hooligans, tearing each other's clothes.
They said they were almost... they were almost raping girls, cutting their skirts with scissors.
Then they'll hold them down, outside, in broad daylight.
This woman had to come out of her car, with her, her escorts.
That was how they were able to save more than a hundred girls, all of them from different pockets of...
You know they would've vowed to deal with them, saying, "I'll show you, I'll show you."
Today we... it might look like fun and games but it's not.
When their clothes were being torn, they were mounting on them, trying to rape them.
I'm telling you!
Pi-... kids who had finished taking the... the WAEC exams, or finished their school term!
It was such a di-... a disheartening story to read, if you're a mother.
I'm so happy that the Lagos State Government has taken this thing up.
Because we shouldn't let things like this slide.
At least, all other secondary schools, they have been used as scapegoats.
They won't try it.
Alright, good morning, my beautiful countrymen.
How are you doing?
Yes, this is the hot new segment on the Good Morning Naija Show, which I brought to you this beautiful morning.
My name is Ajibike Ogunlade.
From the very first story, we heard that President Muhammadu Buhari has said that since they have found uh... these eighty two Chibok girls, that they have rescued them and that this is a gift to commemorate their second anniversary to all our countrymen.
Now since Mr Buhari, um... Mr Buhari said so yesterday, in the Presidential Villa, during a small reception which was organized for the rescued Chibok girls.
And in fact, after they were rescued yesterday, they were all taken to Abuja, um... to meet with the President and other important figures.
On this, Mr Buhari has said that he is very happy that the girls have been released.
And in fact, he has promised all of us in the country that his government is very determined to make sure that the remaining girls who are yet to be released and all other persons who have been kidnapped by (uh... that these, these militants have kidnapped), and kept in their stronghold, will also regain their freedom.
Meanwhile, we have heard that the eighty two rescued Chibok girls... (yes, you have heard about it), that they have been treated well, that they have discussed and have met with the Chief of Staff to our President, Mr Abaki Harry.
Apart from that, one of them also said that they have received very good medical attention from the medical team uh... of the Department of State Services.
Now, the person who they spoke with the people who shared the story after this, they've had a discussion.
So it was the Chief of Staff, Staff himself, Mr Abaki Harry.
As he was explaining that they have assessed all the girls, they have carried out appropriate examinations on each and every one of them.
And in fact, he said all of them are in good condition right now.
Also, he said that it looks like they have noticed some injuries on two of the girls.
And in fact, he said that these injuries have no connection with the way they were reportedly rescued.
Also on this, we hear that the way... in fact, the rescue operation carried out on these girls was done in a professional way, and there were no errors.
Now, we heard that the Director of the DSS [Director of State Services] Medicals, Ann Okorafor, has also promised all of us in the country that these girls are in safe hands.
And in fact, she said that they will receive the best medical care available anywhere in the world.
Now, we heard that our President himself, President Buhari, is supposed he has started packing his bags, getting ready to go to London for follow-up medicals with all his doctors over there.
Now, we heard that one of um... these uh... the sources said that Mr President's Spe-... Special Adviser on Media and Publicity, Mr Femi Adesina, announced this yesterday, in Abuja.
Now, according to Mr Femi as well, he has been trying to explain that the duration... the period of time which Mr Buhari won't... will stay back in London... he said that only his Doctor can talk about that right now, but that this will not affect the smooth running of things in the country because the government will continue normally under the able leadership of our Vice President.
Still on this, also, Mr Femi Adesina has said that Mr Buhari is very grateful to all those who have been praying for him and for all the good wishes which people have been sending him.
And in fact, he has said that he's hopeful that as we say, they are praying for him, and that in the same way, they will be praying for the peace and unity of our country.
And we also heard that in January, Mr Buhari travelled to London for a similar check-up, and he came back... and he returned on March tenth, after fifty one days in London.
Now uh... it's been brought to our attention that the association of the people handling aviation matters in our country, (uh... now they call themselves the Nigerian Civil Aviation Authority), they have come out to warn passengers who get angry over minor issues.
And when they're angry, they also beat the ones who work with airplanes, uh... maybe the cr-... crew members.
Or they go looking for trouble and beat the people working behind the desks.
They said anyone who takes part in this kind of misbehavior should put an end to it right away.
If not, they said they will sue them all.
Now, this warning in the statement above is such that the General Manager of the association (uh... the... in charge of the media section of public relations), uh... Mr Sam Adurogboye, said so.
Now, according to Mr Sam also, he's been saying that this warning is a result of the reports they were getting that these uh... airline staff are making reports that some people... some people will just get angry with them for things they have no control over.
Now, Mr Sam has said that the airline staff being attacked is a very embarrassing thing.
And in fact, he does not have uh... it's not sensible.
And in fact, that people... that customers take things into their own hands, especially when things don’t favor them.
And he also advised all airlines operating in our country that they should... should uphold... they should strongly enforce the commissions they have; the terms, and conditions, and contracts on all the...
And in fact, they should put it on all the passenger's tickets at all times, so that people will read it, they will see what they're supposed to do and what they're not supposed to do when they have any issues.
Moving on to stories on small businesses, we've heard that the Rice Farmers' Association in Kaduna State said they have come out asking for loans, they want to borrow money.
They said that they want to use the loan to enhance the production of rice for members of uh... their association for the twenty seventeen farming season.
The Secretary of the association, Ishaya Audu, said this yesterday in Kaduna.
I said they should explain all the things they use in the production of rice.
That the things... some of them don’t have any of them.
Some of them don’t have some of the materials again.
And in fact, all these things have been reducing the production of rice in that state.
And in fact his... um... the number of um... the bags of rice they produce is going down because they lack some of these materials.
Now um... according to Mr Audu, he's been trying to explain that most of the farmers now produce at a loss because some of them don’t have fertilizers; some of them don’t have um... um... pesticides which they need to use to chase away all these um... animals that eat their produce.
And in fact... and all this... he said please, he said they should loan them some money to improve production, to organize all the things they need to use for uh... to make sure that the rice they produce is up to standard, so that they'll be able to produce food for the people of our country.
And moving on to my last story, we have heard that in France, yes, the pro European candidate, Emmanuel Macron... yes, we have heard that huge celebrations are going on in France at the moment because he won the French Presidential election um... by between sixty five to sixty six percent of the vote.
Now, we heard that Macron will be the youngest President that France has ever had, and in fact that he beat the National Front leader, Marine Le Pen after a very, very tough contest.
Adding to this, we've heard that Le Pen said that she conceded, that she has agreed that, yes, it's Macron who defeated her.
And in fact, she congratulated him on his victory.
Adding to this, she has told her fans in Fr-... France that Fren-... uh, the French now have chosen their own president.
They have chosen their leader.
And in fact, it's worth noting that they voted for continuity because they liked the guy's... the guy's plans for their country.
Now, we heard that so many people uh... voted for the far right leader.
But right now, everything is up um... to Emmanuel Macron as he got sixty five... sixty six percent of all the votes cast during the election.
Alright, um... and that’s the news we brought your way again today.
Yes, and of course, I won't forget to tell you that for any other news on Wazobia TV, our website is here - www dot Wazobia TV dot TV.
Let's go into our weather studio.
Let's see what's on the weather forecast this morning.
My name is Jibike Ogunladi.
Good morning, Port Harcourt!
My name is Silver Vick.
You know, I'm telling you, very soon, I'll celebrate my one year anniversary of coming teaching you.
Do you understand?
And there is w-... where I stopped last week, that’s where I want to start from.
I...
Porico, I've been talking about something.
I've been... I've been giving an analysis of the average child in Africa, or Nigeria precisely, who studies in a Nigerian University, in fact, most of the Nigerian Univerisities.
And I'm talking about it, I'm saying it aloud; I said I'm angry.
I said, number one, it's totally irrelevant for a kid to go to university in a country where we know that there are no jobs.
Do you understand?
You know that as you graduate from the university, there are no jobs waiting for you.
That's a stupid investment.
That's what the white people call it.
Then in Pidgin English, that's an 'anyhow investment'
Do you understand?
Now if kids are to go to school in this country, then the people in authority should really make sure that they provide jobs so that the gratuating students will employed immediately.
Because every average child is a p-... is their mom's investment.
How are they their parents' investment?
Currently, some parents are working as what we call civil servants.
They'll start work by seven am, and finish by four.
Some of them have been on this job for almost forty years.
Where's the salary going?
They spend it on training kids in schools, and all the Nigerian universities that turn out students who will never be economically relevant.
How?
You studied mechanical engineering, you graduated, and you didn't even open a hood.
How did you study engineering?
You haven't even set your eyes on an engine.
You studied math but on the average, you are better than the lecturer teaching you.
Only one or two... a few private universities, are helping matters, and some that even if you want to go there and then you check the process to get into the school...
The brilliant ones, with sharp minds, don’t get into the schools because if you don’t pay for all the malpractices involved in the process, you don’t get in.
Then the ones who get in corrupt the lecturers by giving them money; sorting everything out.
Then I started taking an assesment of an average child.
How are they an investment?
The budget for an average three month old... just the food budget alone, for their first three months after birth, is over three hundred and fifty thousand.
That's what the father has spent.
So if you see a child of ten years old, you are actually looking at a food budget of over fifteen million naira.
Then when you see a man of twenty five years old, that is over sixty five million naira's worth of food budget.
That's what was spent on a child, just to keep them alive... feeding alone.
Clothing, and housing.
Then housing and clothing is sixty five million.
And then you go to a Nigerian university where you'll spend close to three million to graduate without any trace of what you studied, to start with.
Do you understand?
Then you will graduate
And you will be worth over seventy million.
So what I mean is that only... every avera-... average graduate out there, roaming on the streets, is worth over seventy million naira in hard Nigerian currency and maybe you have about four graduates in your house.
That's your life savings loafing around your house.
Now, where are the available jobs in this country?
Do you understand?
So... if they eventually find jobs, do they get jobs for fifty thousand naira?
A hundred thousand?
Tell me, a chid that graduates, that is worth seventy million, and a food budget budget, and education, including schools that lack lecturers (only a few have lecturers), who graduates and gets a job for fifty thousand, if that child is truly a financial investment to their parents, it means that child will not be able to pay back their mom until they, they die and are reborn seven times over.
So it's called a wasted investment.
Now they tell them there that any business you do in Nigeria, which keeps you up with the local currency, my brother, you are on top of the world.
You're supposed to get into businesses which will give you unprecedented returns that are higher than global inflational rates.
Until the country fixes itself up... since the country doesn't let in foreign investors, we ourselves will bring the foreign investors in.
But first of all, you have to change your means of making money.
You have to change the fact that you must go to work by six a.m., leave by six... by six in the evening.
Because nowadays, if you are working for another person, what do we call that?
Bribing you for your destiny.
Before you figure it out, you're already forty.
Is it at the age of forty you want to realize that you can make shoes or bags?
So is it the first point we need to solve this problem?
The first problem in this country now is poverty, and hunger.
Then the second problem is misplacement of priority.
Because if you go to a Nigerian university, just go and study a course that's relevant to this present day country!
I'm not talking about another country.
If you are in Nigeria and you study sociology, philosophy... that's a misplacement of priority because those kinds of things don’t have value in this nation right now.
You mean you're studying political science?
In these chaotic politics?
And those are the co-... CRK... why don't you go to Bible School?
And those are the courses with the highest number of students.
And if you take a close look at these students, you'll see they're not too bright.
They just want to get through school so they can say they got through school.
Why aren't you able to advise these children?
They should be doing things that will put money in their pockets, being aware of the fact that the more unemployed graduates we roll out, the more problems we create in this country.
Everybody wants to obtain certificates.
So first of all, you who's listening to me, you will solve your financial problem and then you will attend my training so that you will know how to place your priorities right.
And if you've been working for another man for close to thirty years, my friend, it looks like you will be judged twice.
Because once you get to heaven, God will judge you first for your sins and then for wasting your life.
He will ask you, "the gift I gave you, how did you use it?"
"You helped fulfil another man's destiny."
So did the man not have his own plans?
So first of all, if your problem in Nigeria at the moment is how to place three meals a day on your table... when you wake up every morning, your work (I wonder why you go to work) is to place three meals a day on your table, then the truth of the matter is that you don't exist.
The moment you start to exist is the moment you get to that level where you know that you don't have to worry over what you and your family will eat.
That's the point where you can sit down and say, "now, let us change the country!"
You can't tell a man who can't afford three meals a day to go and change the country.
What will he change?
Let hunger deal with him, he will change his decision in five seconds unless the hunger pangs are not strong enough.
As funny as it may sound, and as much as I'm joking, this is a serious matter.
As funny as it may sound and as much as I might be joking, this is a serious issue.
I know that I'm coming from a very humble background.
My daddy is a reverend, my mommy is a pastor.
Then, at the same time, the man was a medical psychologist, and then my mom was a linguist.
Mstchew... when poverty started affecting with us in the house, I told them, "see, this can't work!"
See, I will go in the opposite direction.
I made up my mind.
I told them that I wouldn't go for any engineering course in any school.
They said, "why?"
I said I wanted to be a pilot.
They said, "why?"
I said apart from the fact that any career at all is a career, career... the essence of a career is to make money.
Calling... that is what we are doing.
That this one, this what God gave us.
My career is being a pilot, my calling is to help people succeed in what I'm into.
Whether the calling gives me money or not doesn't concern me.
But you see, that career, piloting, you wouldn't ask me to fly a plane free of charge.
Do you know how much I paid to study in school?
Even now, while I'm still schooling, if you happen to be aboard a plane I fly, it'll end in disaster just like the Sosoliso airplane.
You know!
But so what I now do is, we have set up a standard organization we call the Billionaire's Code.
On the Billionaire's Code, we bring a lot of opportunities which can help you make at least five percent interest on your investment every Friday for the next fifty two weeks.
Meaning that on anything which you invest...
Okay, let me talk money.
Let's say you invest one hundred and thirty seven thousand naira... I won't tell you the name of the company.
That's why I want you to come to the seminar because Nigerians, you are too smart.
As soon as I tell you the name, you would go and Google it, you won't get any information.
I have seen it, I have seen it.
Stop that!
Learn to go to the school of money.
Stop surfing the internet.
What they upload on the internet is the review.
They don’t upload the complete version.
Go, and find out what it's all about.
So that's why you need to attend a seminar.
Don’t invest in something you don’t understand.
It gives you five percent.
So if... if you invest one hundred and thirty seven thousand.
Take away five percent of one hundred and thirty seven thousand.
That way, you can be making around seven thousand to eight thousand naira every Friday.
And they pay you in Euros.
You can withdraw it through uh... cryptocurrency, you can withdraw through OK Pay... you can withdraw it through uh... your direct domiciliary account.
If you check the five percent of one thirty seven thousand naira for fifty two weeks, that’s like tripling your money.
You understand?
And what does this company deal in?
They deal in real estate, bank liabilities, debentures, IPOs.
Do you understand?
So, the reason why we brought in this opportunity is that we want to discourage Nigerians from Ponzi Schemes.
What is a Ponzi Scheme?
A Ponzi Scheme is when you invest one naira and by next week, you get paid twenty naira.
Who did you work for?
How did the money multiply?
Then, you don’t know that that system relies on people in order to grow.
They didn’t create the money from nowhere.
If they get money, it would crash.
Some of them don’t even last for two weeks now.
Now, why do you need those kinds of opportunities so that if you invest something, you would say okay?
Uhuh, this particular money which I invested now, is for my family's upkeep.
I don’t get to run around.
This one brings in five percent every Friday.
Every Monday, they can withdraw it... they can...
Then, you will know that the next batch of money which is on the way, there is another investment but I will not mention its name on air.
But this investment is a huge one which can pay you up to twenty thousand dollars on an investment as low as one thousand dollars in the next seven to eight months when it will be fully launched all over the whole world.
Another one... you will learn more about it.
The third most important thing (outside all these investments I'm talking about)... I am into what they call financial and business mentorship.
I will teach you how to run a business.
You don’t need to open a shop to start a business.
You can work from your living room or your bedroom.
Let me give you an example.
When we were growing up, we knew all those kinds of people which they call uh... ma-firewood (meaning that they sell firewood), uh... ma-akara (meaning that they fry akara), uh... mama tailor (meaning that the woman is a tailor).
As soon as Shell and NNPC started opening up in Nigeria, all those people dumped their machines in a room, packed their firewood to the side, and they went in search of white collar jobs.
So they’ve gone back to basics, brought it out, cleaned it.
Let's start from where we left off.
Do you understand?
When you go to some countries like... (I don’t want to mention names so you don’t think I'm comparing Nigeria to other countries), you would discover that...
In fact, let me mention one, China.
You go to China.
How did China work out their own revolution?
They locked their borders for almost twelve, or ten years.
No one travelled.
They picked people and said "You, travel, go learn and come back."
There are things that you...
In fact, the Facebook we use here, you know that China doesn't use it.
China didn’t allow it.
They said they must use their own app, that the Westerners should develop apps for their own use, and Africans too.
You cannot be here and get across to someone in China, for instance on Facebook.
It's not possible.
That is how developed they are.
Look at this guy now (uh... what is his name?), the one who owns Alibaba dot com, that guy is the one who made online marketing popular.
Because these guys, they think outside the box.
If you go to China, on the whole street, what will every family be selling?
It's light, light, light, light, light, light, and it's consistency.
You would go to another street, even these uh... crypto, crypto which they are talking about, China made it popular.
Hm... they are the ones who started doing it.
Almost everything.
Then, come to Nigeria.
Where is the China of Nigeria?
Haba!
They even produce their own things, and tag it 'Made in Turkey'.
What's your problem?
Is it an inferiority complex, or what?
So what I've been trying to say in essence is that this Sunday, eleventh of June, two thousand and seventeen, by two p.m., as soon as we finish church, don’t go for the second service!
Take an excuse this Saturday, which is today, with your two legs, walk in through the Stadium Road.
As soon as you get to the Airforce Junction, stop at Aztech Event Hall.
Beside Aztech, you will see a hotel which has a big name, Swiss and Spirit... Swiss Spirit Hotel.
Just walk inside, into the hall.
This seat is waiting for you there.
Normally, you know that my seminar goes for twenty five or twenty thousand naira, but for Porico's sake, they have really criticized me, saying that I don’t want to help people with the returns I make; that's why I've made the seminar... the last four seminars of... this last one which I do, free.
Last week's was free, this one is free.
There are still... there are still two or three more, then we'll go back to charging fees.
Now, don’t miss this opportunity!
Even, someone paid for this airtime I'm talking with.
Don’t think that opportunities are just flying around.
Some people make the senseless statement that "opportunities will always come."
Opportunities will always come, but maybe not for you.
Now that the one meant for you has come, take the one meant for you!
Opportunities will always come!
You are twenty years old now, in that time, you will be forty.
And you can't do what you would do when you were twenty.
Do you understand?
Some people are listening to me now.
"Hey, this boy has talent."
"I want to be like him."
My brother, there was a time you had the opportunity, you did not make use of it.
Laziness, that’s what destroyed you.
So what I'm saying now is that you will pick up your phone, and you will send me a text message containing your name, and the word "reserve."
Let them reserve your seat, so that you can send me a text message that you've been admitted into the hall.
But whether you got the message or not, based on MTN problems, you can still come to the venue.
Right now, the number to send the message to is zero nine zero...
Right now, pick up your phone!
I am waiting!
Pick it up; pick it up!
Get your pen, and paper!
I'm waiting!
Good!
Someone would say, "this guy can see me right in my house."
Uhuh, I have seen you!
Right now, once again!
Zero nine zero nine five nine six five three two nine.
I'll call it out again slowly.
Don’t just beep me.
I'm in the studio, and that phone is on.
Don’t cause chaos.
Don’t show me that your chances of being successful have been compromised.
Because lack of discipline means that you wouldn't even be able get from point A to B.
Be very disciplined!
Do not joke with a very serious business opportunity!
Right now, dial the number again, now!
Zero nine zero nine five nine six five three two nine.
I will call it out again.
Zero nine zero nine five nine six five three two nine.
Listen closely!
When come to my seminar on Sunday, don’t come to the seminar just to complain!
You see, this world we're in, uh... everyone has issues.
But somehow, everyone is just hiding theirs in order to find solutions to their problems.
Even if you sit down today, if you stand before a governor, or a president, and you start telling your problems, when you finish, what he'd tell you is, "I'll look into it."
Then, his PA would say, "you just be on the lookout."
My brother, you can be on the lookout till the guy leaves power, begins and ends his tenure as a senator, even begins and ends his tenure as an ambassador... he will not have looked into the problems because he has his own problems.
So now, personalize your problems!
Then tell yourself that this problem you are dealing with now, you brought it upon yourself, and this problem you are dealing with now, you will still be the one to bring yourself out of it.
And how would you do it?
When you are coming to the seminar, when you know that it's an investment seminar you are coming for, you will make up your mind that you will invest this particular amount; you will invest this particular amount.
Not that you will just listen to it all!
First take care of yourself!
Then they'll go back to their house and start feeling like you don’t exist.
Make sure a seat is reserved for you!
This Sunday, I'll be teaching you how to make a six figure income.
I know that's a huge one.
Then, specifically, I will be teaching you how to make about twenty thousand dollars from a little investment, the smallest is one thousand dollars.
And, at the same time, I will teach you how to make five percent on your investment, every Friday, for the next fifty two weeks, which is double your money by about two or three.
I wouldn’t say it’s exactly three times as much because some fractions do go missing.
Then, at the same time, I will be bringing you into what we call "The Billionaire School", where they bring like-minded people together, teaching you what to do with business ideas, and ge-... organize yourself and choose the right career.
As far as you're listening to my voice now, if you end up being poor, it's your problem.
It means that some things have gone wrong with you.
You don’t have any right to be poor.
And it's not by how you dress.
Dress neatly; dress corporate; find your way to Swiss Spirit.
The first small thing to do the reservation is contact zero nine zero nine five nine six five three two two nine.
Zero nine zero nine five nine six five three two nine.
Send the word "reserve" and your name. They will reserve your seat.
Start sending it now!
Don’t bother calling me.
Even if you call for two million years, I will not answer your call because I said, "send a text message."
It's a common instruction for people who want to move forward.
And this morning, if you are in the city of Port Harcourt, as soon as I leave this place, I'm heading straight to the Presidential... myself and the owner of Sahara Energy; myself and the uh... the owner of Kilimanjaro and uh... Market Square; myself and the owners of uh... O Wilson Tea Mate Bread; and also Hilda Dokubo, and lots of them, we are in the Presidential this morning and we are talking at the Niger Delta CEO Summit.
Admission if free of charge and it's for your sake that we're organizing that event.
Uh... if you can come to that venue, start coming right away.
I am going there right away, I am going to take my own session.
That's where you will hear the English version of my talk.
From this place now, we are taking it straight to the roots, where we are coming from.
Okay, my name is Okemute Imonirhua.
I'm from Delta State, I'm Urhobo.
I was born in Warri.
And I grew up in Warri.
I stayed in Warri up until twenty fourteen.
I had my primary school and secondary school education in a place close to Warri.
And then, my university education too, was in Delta State.
So I lived all my life in Delta State, until my job brought me to Port Harcourt in twenty fourteen.
I'm a graduate of library and information science, it's not because that's what I wanted to study in school, but my mom said I should study medicine.
She wanted a doctor.
Thank God that my younger brother is in his final year in medical school now, so she will have her doctor.
But I don’t like sciences.
So, I sat for my WAEC.
I didn’t pass all the subjects.
Then she said, okay, I should go for the pre-degree first.
Then I would sit for it again, until I got to study medicine.
But as I got accepted to study library science, I told myseft that nothing would make me go back to sciences.
So that's what made me study library science at school.
And I, I didn't do bad at school.
I came out with good grades (you know), which they call two one.
And then...
But what I really wanted to do before now is broadcasting.
So when I finished my education, then I got a job in a radio station as a first experience.
With no training.
I did that.
Then I went into the Youth Service Corps in Bayelsa State.
During service, I went to a radio station for training.
I was supposed to teach but I went to the school and said that they should reject me.
I don’t have an interest in teaching.
So I went to a radio station.
There, they trained me in phonetics, and everything, news reading.
Then after NYSC, I got a job again in Warri.
So I worked in Warri, in a radio station, as a presenter for about uh... two years.
Then I left Warri to come...
Actually, I wanted to come to Port... come to Port Harcourt at that time, but it didn’t work out that way.
Then I came to Port Harcourt in twenty fourteen.
I got a job as uh... they call it a call screener on the radio.
Not a presenter.
You're the one who sits where they receive phone calls.
So before the call gets to the studio, first you'll first listen to the people, screen them.
If what they want to say doesn't make sense, you cut them off.
But if what they said will contribute to the program, you allow them to conne-...
Uh... you connect them to the studio.
I didn’t do that for long.
Then I got an administrative job.
So now, it's administrative and HR work I do.
But because I still love uh... broadcasting, I get to read news, along the line.
But the thing is making it very stressful for me because the administrative work is there, and the time for news is a very sacred time.
So sometimes I miss the news, I go to read it late.
So I had to drop news reading.
But I'm still hopeful for the time when I'll be able to go back to broadcasting.
Before we started a TV station in our company, I was working for Cool FM, Wazobia FM, Nigeria Info.
They opened Wazobia Mass TV, and it’s a Pidgin Station.
So I went for auditioning.
Even my boss told me, "ah, just try it, just try it."
"After all, you grew up in Warri."
"So it's Pidgin."
You know that Pidgin... to speak Pidgin, and to broadcast, mtchew, is not the same thing.
But I went for the audition.
I got the job.
So we are yet to go live.
When we go live now, I will be anchoring the morning show.
And then uh... the food show.
We have already started recording the food show (because I like food a lot) on the Wazobia Mass TV.
Uh... one issue I would like to talk about very briefly, is this issue of feminism.
Me, I'm a feminist.
I believe in equality of the sexes.
Even my mother, when we were growing up, anything which my brothers were doing, we would do it too.
She didn't... she let you know that if your brother can do it, you should be able to do it too.
So even if she may not know what feminism is, but she, she was a feminist.
Because she suffered at the hands of her father.
Her father believed that girls are not valuable.
So the father didn't get her educated, he made her suffer a lot.
So because of that, she treated all her children equally.
But with feminism now, me, I feel that some people are taking it to another level.
So this feminism is not feminist.
They hate themselves as women.
Because I have read that... I read recently that some women, maybe, are saying, "ah, why should the Boy Scouts be making women join the Boy Scouts?"
And then some women are calling themselves kings, king of queens.
Nothing is wrong with being a queen.
Because a man is a man.
A woman is a woman.
So sometimes when you say the queen is a king, it means that you are not satisfied with being a queen, and nothing is wrong with being the queen.
The Queen of England is a queen.
And she has a husband, but nothing has taken her position away from her.
Some of these feminists...
I am a feminist, but some people are not feminists.
They are misleading other women, they hate being women, they want to be men by all means.
I should say that many of these feminists (other than...), they are not feminists, they are anti-feminists but in the name of feminism, they are taking the struggle to a whole nother level.
What I know is that if I will... when I have the opportunity to air my show, I will talk about it very well.
That hating men will not make you say that we are superior to men.
In fact, to say that you are superior to someone, you already know that you are inferior to that person.
There is nothing wrong with being a woman.
And you can get all the respect you think you deserve, achieve anything you want to achieve while you still retain your respect as a woman, still living in...
I don’t know if I've been speaking for five minutes.
Or should I keep speaking?
Should I continue?
So yes sir.
One of the issues which I am passionate about is feminism.
Again, another thing which I am passionate about is my belief in God.
You know, yes, uh... I won't be able to say anything about myself without mentioning God and Christianity, you know.
Ah, I'm not trying to preach right now.
But basically, Christianity, for me, is not a religion.
It's just a new life.
Entering into a new life, and seeing things differently.
Because there was... I grew up... I was born in a Christian family.
But at a point in my life, I just told myself, "please, uh... God alone is not the way."
I tried to explore Eckankar.
Nothing is wrong with it, but then, I had an encounter with God one day.
What made me...
That day, I woke up and I was crying.
I won't be able to talk about it now because it would be too long.
But, but that personal encounter made me say, "ah, I believe in God", not because I was born into a Christian home, but because of that personal encounter with God.
And in my work, I have been seeing many different things.
Before, I used to be very harsh but when, you know, reading about loving your neighbour as yourself, all those things changed me.
And nothing is impossible with God.
That's what Jesus Christ spoke about.
And I've seen it, that nothing is impossible.
Because even my life journey, from where I started from to where I am right now, everything is a journey of faith.
Even the TV show which I want to start so... which I know that I will do very well, is also a journey of faith.
So, my Christian life makes me believe that nothing is impossible for me to achieve.
I can live like... get everything which I've wanted in life, and enjoy life beautifully in health, in peace, and of course when I die, I still have hope in where I am going.
And uh... hehe... thank you!
Uh... one time I was with my mom and dad in the village, after I was grown (I was like eight), and my grandmother came to visit us.
She wanted to take me to go and train me.
Because at my dad's, we could only go to the farm.
At the time, I was small and could farm really well.
My grandmother said this farm, this farm work was no good for me.
That I should go to school first.
So I went to my grandf-... grandmother's.
I was schooled there for four years.
After those four years, my mom said the work had become too much for her to do alone.
That I should come help her for a while.
I was there, helping her.
I kept farming.
I farmed for almost five years.
I didn't go back to school.
I stayed there
Ha! Even for money to buy things, you won't see any money.
For any little thing you do, though, you will make money quick.
Finding something to do, that was the hard part.
Until there were a lot of us.
So my friend and I, we started to work together for people.
Then, at the end of the year, they would come give us our money.
We would use it to buy clothes, anything we wanted.
We used it to take care of ourselves.
Then we did "waye" work again, we got the money and shared it
All of us said we wanted to go to school.
We wanted to go back to school.
So, then I went to school until two thousand and eight.
Then I finished primary school there.
I told my father, well, I want to go to the city to go see how the school is.
That I was tired of school in the village.
My father said okay, he will get money to register me anywhere I want to go to start secondary school.
I said okay.
That's what we did.
My father said it wouldn't be until after December, around January, that he would get me registered.
So, right then, that my uncle came from Abuja.
He came to construct a building for one of our uncles.
He then came.
When he was leaving he said I should be ready for him to take me to Abuja.
I said "alright."
"Do you want to take me to Abuja?"
He said "yes."
I said "okay, but uncle, I want to go to school."
He told me not to worry.
If he takes me, I'll go to school.
So I said okay.
The time came when we wanted to leave.
So the two of us got on the bus for Abuja.
When I got to Abuja, I stayed there.
At that time, I couldn't... I couldn't speak English fluently but I was getting by.
So, then my uncle came.
I was there for like a month.
Now I could speak.
Then my uncle said we should go to school.
I then went to school to register.
It was from there that I started school.
I went to school and then came back home to stay.
I told my uncle I could not stay at home any longer.
If I come back, if I am back from school, I should find a job to learn.
My uncle asked what my problem was and why I wanted to learn a trade.
I said uncle, the problem is, nobody knows what the future will bring.
Maybe I can finish the junior WAEC.
I don't have any money to go back to school.
Or look at how, uh... money is now, it doesn’t flow like before any more.
So my uncle said "okay."
What did I want to learn?
I told him I wanted to learn to cut hair.
He said okay, I should go for it.
Then I went to meet a guy I knew.
I told him I wanted to learn a job from him.
He said okay, I should go call my uncle.
I told him okay, before I go call my uncle, he'll tell me what to bring
Before I go tell my uncle, let me know what he meeds to bring.
He said okay.
We'll get crates of soft drinks, and some cookies, and money.
Since he knows me, we'll bring eight thousand naira.
I said okay.
I went to meet my uncle.
So my uncle said okay, tomorrow morning, before he goes to work, I'll take him there.
So we went there and met the guy
He told the guy that he would bring al-, everything he had listed.
The man said okay, I can start learning today.
I then stayed there learning the trade.
Then my uncle brought everything.
The man said I'd stay with him for five years to learn the job.
I then told him "well, but what if I master the skills before the five years, I can go open my own shop, right?"
He said yes but I will graduate first before I go open my own shop.
I said "okay, if that's it, no problem."
So I continued working on and on and on.
Until the time came that I wanted to write the junior WAEC.
I already mastered the job and was making money.
I then realized that in this country of ours, things were starting to become difficult.
I then told my boss "Well, there is this job I found."
"Let me go do it and they will pay me."
"So if they pay me, I will get the money for my graduation."
My boss said "okay", I should go.
As long as place I was going was good, I should be careful there.
I said "okay."
I was there.
I went to work.
After I worked and the woman paid me, I started completing the junior WAEC.
Before I could get the money, my uncle gave me some.
I went to register for senior high.
From there I went to school until the last year, two thousand and sixteen, when I wanted to write the WAEC.
Even sometimes, to pay tuition, I would, I wouldn't have the money to pay on time.
So they would send me home.
I didn't go to school for like a week.
I said let me go and get a manual job.
Maybe I would get something to pay my tuition so my uncle could help me with the rest.
I was working.
Until the time we wanted to write the WAEC.
I couldn't make money.
And my uncle didn't have any money either.
One of his in-laws was even sick.
All the money he had, he used for his hospital bills.
From there, one day, I told my uncle "look at the WAEC, the WAEC is here."
People had started registering.
I never registered.
So how will I take the exam?
My uncle said well, if I didn't do it this year, I shouldn't get angry, I should go get a job and he too would try his best.
The following year, I might be able to take the exam.
I told my uncle "okay, let's see what God can do."
I was there hoping.
I had no job.
I kept looking for a job.
There was no job.
For almost half a year, I didn't find any job.
One day, my uncle told me he'd seen a place.
I should let him take me there to work.
I went.
After working for a month, at the end of the month, the woman should pay me.
The woman said she didn't have the money.
I should wait a few weeks.
I repeated "a few weeks?"
She said "yes."
Years had passed, and the WAEC was coming up.
I said "okay, no problem."
I waited.
Until the day the woman wanted to pay me.
She paid me and said well, I couldn't keep working.
I said "hey! What's the problem?"
She said she couldn't keep owing me money.
That even for the work I just did, paying me was difficult.
I said "okay, no problem!"
That was how I went back.
This year I'm going to take the WAEC exam again.
This year is the worst.
I haven't had any work this year at all.
Even getting by is by God's grace.
Now I am managing.
Then I said "well, uncle, can't I take the WAEC exam this year?"
My uncle said "well, he doesn't have any money."
Taking the WAEC exam costs thirty eight thousand naira now.
I said that before I take the WAEC, I need almost fifty thousand.
Let me register for the NECO and WAEC together.
Everything will cost a lot of money.
I said "okay."
He said "what we will do is, at the end of the year, I will go for coaching classes."
Let me go and take classes.
I said "okay."
There came a time, two months ago, when they were sitting for the JAMB.
I told my uncle "Well, the JAMB is here, can I go take it too?"
My uncle said well, I could go take it.
But he asked what I wanted to study there, since I did not know what it would be like.
I said "well, I know a bit about computers."
But before they start, they will teach us how to go about it and so we went there.
My uncle said I should go ask how much registration would cost.
I went.
They told me it is five, five, that is how they do it.
Then I went to meet my uncle and told him the price.
My uncle said okay, I should go.
I should come, he would go borrow the money to give me.
I came and he borrowed the money.
Then he gave it to me.
I went to register.
After I registered, I took the JAMB exam.
After I took it, I was biding my time.
So then, one day, my uncle asked about the result, and if I passed, where I would want to go afterwards.
Would I go to a university or would I go...?
I said "well, even though I will go to university, I do not have my WAEC results yet."
"I can't go like that."
He said "okay."
There was no money for the WAEC.
I want to go to university.
I said "well, then let us see what God will do for us."
Especially, with the way our country is at the moment, we don't have anything anymore.
Even people who are working for the government, they're complaining about not having any money either.
Greetings, guys.
So, I just want to talk uh... about uh... wife beating.
You do not understand what the women ba-...?
The, the, way they beat, beat women.
The way that they mu-.
The way they do not even treat uh...women like human beings.
I really don’t know.
This really does happen a lot in Nigeria.
A person will get married, he will have a woman move in, he doesn't know he never liked the woman.
Why did he marry her then?
That is what I just don’t know.
Later, even if it's money he doesn’t have.
And you just try uh... to do som-...
Even if it is leaving the house, you should even leave the house!
But it is uh... anger.
You will just be angry, you will just be beating the woman everytime.
Sometimes, they will even just take a knife, and like stab the woman everytime.
I just don’t understand.
Wait, is it because women can't fight or do anything
And even in Nigeria, I don’t even know whether they, they really look into this matter.
I just don’t understand.
I just don’t know.
This matter, it is just, it is becoming serious, it is happening more and more every day.
I just don’t know what is happening.
The thing, it even leads to uh... uh... human uh... uh... uh... trafficking where a person will see a woman...
Even the, even we notice all this human traffi-, uh... trafficking, where they uh... carry uh...women.
They will carry them, they will export them like rice.
Are they rice?
Are they pencils to export and import?
Even men, if they say they want to add men, it's one in ten.
It is women who will s-, let's say they are uh... ninety nine uh...percent.
Women are one uh... percent.
Why?
They will just be using women, beating them anyhow.
I am saying Nigeria should look into this matter.
It is not good, it is not good.
A lot of the time, this thing, it destroys families.
If children, small children see this thing, it'll just increase every day.
If a small child just...
We think that all these small children, they don't know anything.
I'm telling you, small children, they know something, but they know more than us because, at that time, there is nothing in their brain.
They don't think about anything.
We're the ones who get all these things in our head.
We will say "ah! We want to get work, I want to go to work, ah! This thing that I do for work, everything I am doing for this place, I need to go to Oshodi!"
All these things are in our heads, but when it comes to small children, they don't have anything in their heads.
So, anything that they see, that they hear, even if they cannot say anything, those things get wired in their brain even when they become adults.
So, that's what is making this thing continue.
A child who says he sees his daddy beat his mummy, if that child grows up, do you want to tell me that that child will not be... be a wife uh... uh... uh... uh... beater when he gets married?
That's how it will be now.
It will just continue like that, and the thing cannot stop.
I say that charity begins at home.
Let us start this thing for, for, for our own self.
Nobody will do it for us.
It's us who will do it for ourselves.
We will do it for ourselves.
Nigerians, I beg you.
Let's act in a good way, don't let us spoil ourselves, but make at... at least, Nigeria better.
When it comes to mo-, moral civilisation (if that's what I want to call it), let's just be good to each other, don't let us just be...
In fact, if it's our own family members, don't let us do bad to our own family members.
Thank you.
I know that right now, they have even created...
It is good that they have created this uh... women empowerment uh... thing uh... for Nigerians, for Nigerians.
And there is even one (I don't remember the exact name), which they have created for all this uh... uh... demoralisation of women, uh... demoralisation of uh... women and even children.
So, when you see someone, if it is on your uh... uh... doorstep, if it is in your uh... uh... uh... uh... neighborhood that you see a man beating women (sometimes, they don't even care if it is outside, they will even strip a woman and beat her severely), don't just leave it saying uh... this thing is none of your business.
It is!
It's everyone's business!
Because some people will just want to say "please, I don't wanna interfere in this matter".
If that man kills that woman in that place, don't you know that God will... will... will deal with you?
God will deal will you, God will punish you because you were there and you did not stop it.
If you can stop the man, stop him!
And if it means reporting to where he needs to be reported, take him to the police!
Go and report him to the police!
Because that thing is not good, it's not good.
That's why I even like foreign countries.
In some foreign countries, they don't allow anyone to touch uh... anyone.
If it is touching a child; if it is touching a uh... uh... uh... uh... wife, you are not su-, you don't... you cannot... you can't try it now, you can't try it, you can't do it.
Please, when you see a wife, a wife, women, when any man beats you, go and report him to the police.
This, go and report it!
Report!
Whether it is your husband, he's not supposed to do that to you.
Thank you!
That's what I wanted to tell you.
Me, my name is Joseph Aseginmba.
I come from a family of five.
Two are girls.
Then the other three are boys.
But later on, well, one of the girls she... she... died.
Though only one of the girls remains here.
And I come from uh... Plateau State in Nigeria here, which is in the Middle Belt.
Uh... that's where I come from.
And uh... in the long run, my father... my mother was the first to die, then my, my mother followed suit.
You understand?
So... and I am... then I... then I...
After my National Diploma, I got a job at the National Open University.
That's where you get the chance to hustle, they, they do some sign things.
They use it for school, in fact, they use it to help other families.
That's the hustling method.
Abuja is a very good place to stay.
But the, the cost of living of the people in Abuja now, it's, it's high.
It's not a low standard.
But there are some ghetto areas.
It's not like there are no ghettos here.
But, yet, the ghetto area is just like the city in my... in the place where I come from.
You understand?
So... but staying in Abuja is, is the best... is the best thing to do.
Everybody wants to be in the Federal Capital City.
You understand?
But life in Abuja is very expensive.
Housing, transportation, food are very expensive.
And it's because of my father's death.
The m-... my own... the... my mother's death is not painful to me because in her case, she, she, she was sick for a long time.
She co-... then she died.
But in my father's case, he was not sick.
Nothing was wrong with him.
He just went out in the morning.
He just came back.
He was not feeling well.
We took him to the hospital.
Before you knew it, he was dead.
So I was really surprised.
Mstchew then I realised that anything, even what I was doing... I will just remember that this life is vain.
If you go out and come back without coming down with an illness and nothing is wrong with you, you should really thank God for that.
Pidgin is not a language that one can master completely now, but the little ones I know, I will say it.
Ehen.
Myself, uh... I come from a ghetto.
So Pidgin, at least, that's what we grew up with.
You understand?
It's something we have been into since our childhood.
The, the Queen's English, we started learning it when we went to school.
So it's a normal thing to speak Pidgin throughout life.
As for the current government, they are really doing their best for Nigeria.
They are doing their best on the issue of corruption.
Definitely, what they are doing is... it will really help the masses in Nigeria, but the people who will enjoy it... it's not time yet.
It's later? the enjoyment will come later.
Definitely, the government is doing their best.
They should keep it up, up, just as it is.
And all these divisions in uh... Nigeria, the issue of Biafra, mtschew, I don't like it because if you check it [you'll realise] that in the Ea-... in the East, people are not... [there's] no, no infrastructure.
If they say they want to divide Nigeria now, where will they start?
They don't have a place to stay.
Everywhere, per se, is the secretariat.
There is no...
And in that place, they place high value on landed properties as if it's gold.
Ehen... if you take a look at the North now, most of them (for instance in this Abuja) most of them are selling water and pushing carts.
Okay, if they split now and they go back to the North, now, who will buy their water and barrow, huh?
Will they push their barrow there?
So let's just stay united... let's just stay together.
We will move Nigeria forward.
Mstchew I don't watch...
At most, what will make me... I unwind by browsing.
We browse the net, chat, I mean we get to know different things on the internet, things I didn't know until now.
I will go and research.
Ehn, the problem is just that...
If I get tired, I'll go and relax with friends and come back to the house by ten o' clock.
Should I start?
Okay, in this year twenty eighteen, man, I'm praying for God to help me.
Help my business, help everything I do, even my de-, de-, destiny, even my father, even my dad, even my sister, even my future wife, even my girlfriend.
Oh eh, God, dear God, help me in whatever I do.
Help me, hm... even in Enugu where I'm living.
Help me, even my boss, even whatever, whatever I put my hands on.
God help me, help me, help me.
This is my... this is my prayer.
Okay.
Okay, from now until...
From thi-... from this, uh... January, till after January, I want...
From the... from January... from January to, for some... from January to February, God, help my, help my mom.
From February till March, help my father, from March to April, help my girlfriend, from April till December, help my boss.
Uhuh, in this country of ours, Nigeria, I am fed up with this Nigeria.
I wanna move.
I wanna go to Malaysia.
You see this, all the gu-... guys in Malaysia, uh... mtschew, I want to meet up with them.
These guys in Malaysia are really making some money there.
I wanna go there.
The guys in Malaysia, I want... I want...
I really want to be a Malaysia guy.
I wanna make money in Malaysia.
Malaysia's where I wanna be.
I'm tired of this country.
In fact, if I... if I... if I leave this country uh... mtschew, I'm not coming back.
I'll stay there forever.
This is...
In fact, I'll marry a white girl.
I'd even marry a Malay girl, a Malaysian girl.
They are... they're fi-... they, they, they’re fine you know.
They, they're even better looking than Nigerian girls.
Even all this hardship in our country has started affecting our, our girls.
Okay.
So Malaysia, Malaysia re-... Malaysia remains my top option for now.
I don't have any other country apart from Malaysia.
I want to go to Malaysia, I need Malaysia, I need Malaysia's money, I need Malaysia, everything from Malaysia, even a Malaysian car.
I'm tired of Nigeria.
Almost everything in Nigeria is bad.
I don't need Nigeria anymore.
Thank you.
Yeah, I don't need Nigeria anymore.
Nigeria is crappy country.
A crappy country.
I'm tired of Nigeria.
Everything in Nigeria is bad.
Noth-, nothing is good in this country where we're... nothing is good, not even the cars.
When it comes to celebrations, we can't pu-... have any?
When it comes to hospitals, oh!
That one, we've suffered too much.
We've...
Nothing is good in Nigeria.
Nigeria is, it's a bad country.
It's a bad country.
I'd be better off if I went... I'd be better off if I go and die in China than stay in this country now.
Yeah.
Nigeria's no good anymore.
This time around, Nigeria's prophets are too tough!
Uh...
When we... when we... when we get to the New Year, yeah, Nigeria's prophets, they're way too bad.
All of them will continue to predict.
All of them, all of them will continue to predict.
And predict.
Afterwards, they will tell us God told them.
What is it?
It's not God who told them.
I can't see any God there.
Can God tell some...?
Can God lie?
How many gods do we have in this world?
How many prophets do we have?
This prophet will tell you this.
Another prophet will tell you that.
Ah!
This kind of prophet is too much!
This thing is... this thing is just a Nigerian prophet.
It's not God that told them.
Mtschew.
Uh, I don't want, uh, I don't... I, I don't care for these uh... Nigerian... uh... prophets.
They are a lot of trouble.
They are just using it to make money.
Wh-... what no...
God didn't... God didn't tell them anything.
Next year, even if there is nothing to fear, nothing to fear, they'll keep going.
There's uh... a prediction for twenty nineteen.
Uh... twenty ninety, nineteen, a prophecy, twenty eighteen, a prophecy.
That means God only comes once a uh... once in a... in a year.
God can tell them gu-... anything once a year.
God tells this one one thing.
God tells a different one another thing.
Hm!
That means God is g-...
How many gods do we have?
Seriously.
Uh, in this country where we, this white oho.
What uh...
Light is, light is...
They're giving us...
Sometimes, they bring the... they... they bring the light up to one hour, to almost thirty minutes.
If they bring it, it is not full voltage.
This country is difficult to live in, the country is very difficult to live in, it is really very hard.
My friend, to tell you the truth, this country is not working.
This is a terrible country.
We need another country.
If I go-... if... if it is possible, we should give Nigeria a new name.
We should turn Nigeria into America.
It would be better.
In fact, we should change Nigeria, Nigeria into Biafra.
Biafra is the best country now.
Nigeria is, Nigeria is past its prime.
Nigeria's not even a country anymore.
We need another country.
Yeah, we need another country, right?
In f-... in fact, we need to change Nigeria into America.
It would be better that way.
If you change America to... if you change Nigeria to America, I'm praying fo-... I'm praying for America, American gifts to come to Nigeria.
American gifts will come to Nigeria so that we...
We should try to make our country a good one.
Okay.
Okay.
Good afternoon.
My name is Joke Babatunde.
I'm from Ondo State.
I live in Ibadan.
I want...
I've lived in so many places in Nigeria.
I've spent a long time living in the North.
I've lived in so many places.
I wanna teach you a recipe I learned from my friend.
It's eaten mostly by the Igbo people.
The name of the dish is ofe nsala.
In the Igbo land, that means bitter leaf.
The ingredients they use for cooking it are bitter leaf, palm oil... palm oil, pepper, salt... pepper, salt, meat, dried fish, stock fish, tripe (the thing that's peeled from a cow, which was inside a cow and was peeled off), ponmo [cow skin], ogiri [a flavoring made of fermented oil seeds] and Maggi [cubes].
The dish, you'll first of all wash the bitter leaf... the bitter leaf very well.
You'll wash it till the bitter taste goes away, so it won't be bitter in the dish.
Then again, we need something else.
We need uh... ede.
They call it ede in Igbo.
And it's uh... cocoyam.
So first I'll cook the cocoyam.
Once I've cooked the cocoyam, then I'll...
When the cocoyam is ready, I'll wash my mortar.
Then, I'll pound the cocoyam.
If I pound the cocoyam... they add cocoyam to bitter leaf because they want it to be thick, so it won't be watery.
So if I wash my bitter leaf... when I've finished washing my bitter leaf, I'll put, put water on fire, grind my pepper, and put it in.
Then I'll put in my tripe, my meat, and my dried fish.
I'll add my stock fish.
Once I've put everything into the pot, it will be boiling, I'll leave it so the pepper will really get into the meat.
Then I'll leave it to boil really well.
When it's boiled very well, I add my Maggi, add my ogiri, add everything, add the salt so it will taste good.
So if I notice that all the ingredients are done, the pepper has gotten into the meat, and the tripe, and the cow skin, everything... then, I put in the bitter leaf.
So when I've put in the bitter leaf, then I'll add my palm oil into it.
So when I've added my palm oil, everything will boil.
Then I will leave it.
When I realise it's done, it has started entering... then I will put in my uh... then I will put in my, my ede.
That's my cocoyam, which I pounded.
I will put it on the side.
So once it is done, within five minutes, when I notice that it is well done, I will take it off the fire.
And you can eat this kind of sauce I'm talking about with pounded yam, you can eat it with fufu, you can eat it with uh... even your semovita.
But the dish... the dish is very tasty.
So this is the type of dish I know, and I want to teach you.
I want to talk about another dish which I know of.
That dish, it's the Warri people... and uh... Warri people, and uh... Warri people, and uh... ban-... uh... the Bayelsa people who eat it very well.
All these people who are in the Niger Delta are the ones who eat this dish.
The name of the dish is banga
And the ingredient they cook banga with is this palm kernel... palm fruit... palm fruit which comes from pa-... uh... palm tree.
So we will take fully ripe palm tree fruits, we will take them... take them and peel them.
Then I will boil my, my palm fruits.
Then the ingred-... another ingredient which I need is Banga ingredient.
You will just go to the market.
You will ask for Banga ingredients.
Banga ingredients, you will get all those ingredients, they'll have pounded it for you, you'll have mixed it together.
Then I need pepper.
Then I don't need palm oil again.
I need salt, and I need Maggi.
Because once all those things are already in the dish, everything has...
You don't need to add palm oil because the palm fruits will let out palm oil.
So if I cook the palm oil... then I will cook the palm fruits.
So once the palm fruits are well cooked, I'll boil it.
I'll boil it.
When I finish boiling it, I will pound it.
So once it is pounded, I will pour it into a mortar uh... this thing, wash it.
Then I'll wash it very well with my hand, take out all the palm oil in it.
So when I've taken out all the palm oil in it, then I'll set the palm oil on fire.
As I set the palm oil on fire, I will add the pepper I planned to add... fresh pepper.
I'll pound it.
Or I can put it into it, I'll put in the Banga ingredients so that it will... everything will boil together.
So when I've poured it in, I'll add the Banga ingredients so it will... everything will boil together.
So as all the ingredients boil, I'll...
Later, once it's boiled very well, when I realise that it is becoming thick and the oil has started coming up, that means that it's done, and I will add my meat.
I'll add my meat, add my fish, add my stock fish, add my crayfish, add all ingredients into it.
So once I've added all these things, and everything in the dish has boiled, that means the dish is ready.
So once the dish is ready, we eat it with starch.
We'll prepare our starch, we'll eat the Banga with starch.
We can eat our Banga with uh...
We can eat it with Akpu, we can eat it with rice.
If we don't have tomatoes, at times, we eat Banga with Rice.
So that's the other kind of dish I know.
My people, good evening!
Uh... my name is Kabiru Sule.
I come from Kastina State.
My mother is an Edo w-... is an Edo woman and my father is a Kastina man.
Uh... I am thirty three years old.
I was born in nineteen eighty four.
Uh... I want to tell you a story on, on how our establishment was kick started.
The thing started like uh... ten years ago.
Uh... ninety... two thousand and seven.
Which means my mother likes to work out so much.
When she was young, before she even gave birth to us, she was an athlete.
So, since she... since she's retired now and has given birth to us all, now she's set up the gym.
Gradually, that is how we started.
My people, for your...
We started with four boys' quarters in our house.
Which means that if it rained, you would see the water get everywhere.
That's how my brother and I, we were still little kids, (at that time, we were still in primary school) we would carry buckets of water with my mother.
We would be carrying... we would be packing it.
We would pack the water, climb the stairs and throw it away, climb the stairs and throw it away.
We would pack the water, and carry it.
The same thing.
We would just rinse and repeat the proccess.
So, as God blessed us, we started working hard. Then we started moving on.
Before we knew it, we found a place we could rent.
But I'm in Kaduna now.
Now we're in Kaduna, in the North.
And in our stadium, there are places which they, which they are giving out, which they are renting out to people.
So, if you want to get... if you have one package that you want to run (maybe sports; maybe it's a dance studio you want to run), you will pay the... you will pay the Kaduna government.
The Kaduna government will give you the place for maybe five or ten years.
So, that's how we sat down, then we opened it, and then we talked to a lawyer.
So, the lawyer now, as we were opening it, we... he asked us what name we would want to give it.
What name do we want to give the business?
My mother said that...
Because at that point, it wasn't like my mother didn't love me.
Uhuh, my people, my mother loves me a lot but her favorite is my brother, Muhammed.
So, as they asked her, then the lawyer...
When the lawyer asked my mother what she wanted to call gym, she said, "Muhammed Gymnasium is what we want to name it."
Momo's Gym.
Me, a grown-up, I didn't even have a problem with it like "ah, why didn't they name it after me?"
Give it another name!
But at that point, me, I just knew that we were starting a business and we would not be packing...
We would not be using buckets, water buckets to remove water from our gym any more.
So, before we knew it, the lawyer said well, the place, the stadium where we were is called Murtala Muhammed, Murtala Muhammed uh... Stadium.
So, the lawyer said well, if we put my brother's name there, then it w-... it will be like this Murtala Muhammed owns the place.
He asked how many children she had.
So my mother told the lawyer she had two sons.
What is the other son's name?
Kabiru.
At the time, I didn't know whether the guy was just fooling my mother.
He told her, "well, Kabiru. People don't really use Kabiru that way, for business."
Use Kabiru for business, for business.
So, that's how the story goes.
How they started calling the place Kabiru Gymnasium.
It's not like it's really a fantastic thing.
Because people, I have heard people say...
That's how it is, my, my people, you should hear the story.
I was in the gym one day, I was working.
I know I have gone off course from what I was... wanted to tell you.
It's history but, I just do, want to tell you...
It's one very good example now.
There was a day I was working hard in the gym.
The clients that were there, who come to work out with us, they didn't know that me, I was, I was the owner's son.
And me, I don't like to show off anywhere I go.
I like to be humble, be quiet, without telling people that...
So that way, you will, you will know who is who.
As I sat down, this one client was trying to get to know me.
Then he started telling me some funny gossip.
I just looked at the guy.
The gossip is that, he said, ahah!
He heard that the woman who owns this place (he didn't know she was my mother), he said that the woman who owns this place, that she only has one child.
Ahah!
I said, ahah, Simbo what's this guy saying?
She has only one child?
And she doesn't have a husband, and it's her boyfriend...
She is... she is sleeping with all these young men.
And he's the one giving it to her.
My people, do you see this kind of problem?
I don't know...
Why rumours?
Why do we really like spreading rumours?
You don't have the facts.
You don't know anything.
Now, I called this guy later on.
The next day, I let him say all he had to say.
We laughed all through.
Then the next day, I called him aside.
I said, come let me...
Ah, come on boss, come, let's talk, let's talk.
I then pulled him to one side and told him "look, that story of yours you heard, that you... that you were telling me yesterday... that story you told me yesterday, it did not please me."
"Because this gym, is my mother's gym."
"First and foremost, she has children."
"She doesn’t have just one child."
"She has several children."
"I am her last child."
"And me, talking to you, I am older than you by two or three years."
"We have four more..."
"I have four siblings."
"Some of them are married with children."
"So... and the fact that... you were saying that she is chasing after young men, my mother is happily married."
"My father is alive."
So, that's how one thing led to another and I then I became good friends with this client.
And uh... as God blessed us even more, we moved from Murtala Square.
God blessed us, then we bought our land and we built our structure on it.
Even today, this client still comes in, still comes to this gym and, he has become, like a part of our family now.
Alright, if you're listening to me, this is my own little story of how my first day of... at uh... school, Kaduna State University basically went.
So a long time ago, I was hearing that the university is a big place where you come to, you know, and meet people, as in...
My mindset towards these things is that you...
When you get into the university, you get to meet the big shots, different kinds of people, but guys, the kind of picture I saw over there, guys... I got tired of the part time program, I swear to God.
So when I came in as a freshman, the usual practice is that in college, students don't gather together on the assembly ground.
So I met a guy, by chance.
I started enjoying hanging out with the guy.
Man, what's up?
Where's the assembly ground?
This guy really laughed at me.
Mstchew.
Man, it was not easy that day.
I started thinking that I should just like... call it quits.
I should just go back to my dad's.
But if the worst happens, I have to move on.
That's life.
So on that note, I pushed on, asking one or two questions, and I met some kinds of people.
In fact, the way they looked at me, you know the way I dress, thinking that becoming a big boy... a new student, coming in as a freshman (you know), wanting to get uh... a hold on the university life.
So we came to a point where we finished registrations.
After a few weeks, we were asked to start classes.
I was thinking that it's that kind of secondary school thing where we will be... we'll be talking, you know.
Aha!
I was fed up.
Then I was complaining to one of my friends.
I said, "guys, is this how things work in the university?"
"What kind of uniforms do we wear?"
"Is it shorts or pants; long sleeve shirts or what?"
You know, based on my secondary school experience.
But the whole college thing was like a totally different experience.
So when lectures started, as usual, there were lots of girls and guys.
Everyone was giggling, moving around, you know.
So had the very first lecture.
I won't forget it.
Math 101.
Guys, it was not easy to solve some kinds of math after several years, but usually as a Kaduna guy there's no messing around.
It's a win-win situation, at most.
No loss.
We got a draw.
When the lecture was over, we got going.
That was when I got to know what they call the school market.
Man, you don't need to try the kind of things there!
Check out the restaurants, check out the fries!
There are different kinds of things there, you know.
Which will drain your pocket.
But those side attractions didn't really grab me.
But guys, when I saw the kind of ladies that were there, guys, I was overwhelmed.
Mstchew!
Then I started thinking.
Is it for school I came here or is it for the birds?
But when you get to a level like that, a guy's gotta... you know, a guy's gotta show off.
So as things unfold, I came in contact with a lady.
Her name is Deborah.
We got to the point where we were enjoying being together.
So this lady and I started a one on one relationship.
And luckily enough, the babe is a freshman like myself.
She also lacks experience.
She and I are the same blind horses that like to run in the same dark uh... this thing.
So we went into a restaurant.
As a sharp guy, it occurred to me that I'll be the one to pay for her meal.
In other words, it means man, I'm stuck!
I sized up the situation at hand.
Guys, they call it silva in Hausa.
That calls for fifty naira!
That means you're able to afford it!
So this babe started ordering some things which are beyond my means.
But as a normal guy, if the worst happens, when you wake up in the morning, in this kind of uh... northern setting, you can't go without getting into small problems, and small problems like fifty bucks.
At worst, it means you are done showing off that morning.
At least, you get organised so that you feel OK for the whole day until maybe later something will come up like that.
So this babe just started placing her orders.
I saw fried rice and pshew, the thing came out.
She called for chicken, the thing came out.
She called for soft drinks, the thing came out.
A'Ah!
So she got tired
Myself, I'm not placing orders for anything.
She didn't know that I don't like...
Instantly, she worked out that all these things will be on me.
So I was trying to blend in, blend in, blend in, blend in.
Luckily enough, when I was ready to leave in a hurry, I saw one of my boys, because that... the guy is...
During registration, that's where we got to know each other.
So in the restaurant, the other guy was bringing the bill for me at last.
When the bill was placed on my table, my eyes... my eyes lit up just like someone who just saw a ghost or something like that.
I said, "what is this?"
I was pissed off, eh.
I just calmed down, relaxed... I just handed the bill to the girl and told her I would be back.
Those guys, they need my attention.
So little did I know that the babe herself was street wise.
She wanted for me to like drop my phone or something like that so if I go, I won't get out of the... I won't get out of paying, something like that.
So there and then, I finally came back.
Mtschew, since I felt like maybe this thing... she also, as she was placing orders for those big, big things, she was hoping that based on the way I dressed... you know the way I like to combine things and put everything on the right way...
He's a big boy and all that.
Little did she know I had no money on me.
I only had fifty naira on me.
So that's where this babe and I talked.
So that's how we washed plates for the entire day.
Uh... man, college life isn't easy, man.
So from then on, I started picking up experience that taught me that in this life, even if the worst thing happens, just be yourself.
At all... come out straight and tell them, "look what the matter is at hand!"
It's either you're lucky or not; whatever the outcome, it will be clear to you.
That's how it is.
Classes went on.
That's how we've been learning day by day... day by day... day by day, up until now.
There was one lady, she just went into the shop.
Then she said she wanted to do facials.
I now told her "okay ma'am, you need to steam your face."
She said "ah! what do you mean steaming?"
It's where we use a bath and get into it, put her face inside, uh... put her face inside.
It's a shame for that woman!
Where is she from?
I don't... I don't know.
Which village is she from please?
I don't know where she came from.
Mstchew!
Then I took her to the spare room.
Then, I explain to her "see how the machine is, it will steam your face."
She said, "ah! Why?"
She hasn't seen steaming, uh... the way they do facials on television?
She hasn't seen it.
It's a shame.
So I showed her that this is how smoke will be coming out.
She said "ah, you! Do you want to burn my face?"
I said, "ma'am, no. It's just..."
It's an extractor.
You didn't tell her it was an extractor?
Haha, I told her... I told her the thing was an extractor.
It's a shame.
Which level is she now?
Now I explained to her.
Now she said let...
Then I told her to calm down because the smoke is just steaming, the thing will just steam her face.
It's to remove all that dirt on her face now.
Yes now, it...
It's a shame.
Mstchew.
Then I explained, explained, explained.
I used the best English I could.
Must she even do the facial now?
Is it to show off?
It's pride for her husband now.
It's a shame.
So her husband will see that her face is bright, that kind of thing.
Her husband will leave all those small small girls he follows right?
That is what we do and do it.
Then I explained everything I could, I used my best English every which way.
Turned it, turned it, turned it.
Hey!
At last, she agreed.
Let me give you the gist about what happened with me today.
What happened?
The day I was doing nails, one girl came from the village.
She was pretending to be a city girl.
Sit down and let me do your nails for you!
These girls were snubbing me now.
Aha!
I now told her, "lady, which style do you want to do now?"
Then she showed me this one type of manicure on Instagram she wanted to do.
Do you know who did the nails?
Who did them?
Tonto Dike.
Hee!
She said she liked the nails, she was into that long one.
Then I told her, "lady..."
A very long one!
Then she was looking at me like I don't know nails.
Then I told her, "lady, I know hairdressing, I know this work. I wasn't hired to do this work today."
So, when I told her that, she said okay, I should do the manicure for her.
Now she was bargaining.
A manicure that we do for two thousand, she said she was going to pay eight hundred for.
I said oh yeah?
Oh yeah?
Where are you from now?
Lady, we don't do that kind of manicure in this shop.
Don't you know that our shop is a standard one?
Uhuh!
Then she said that she doesn't have enough money, this is what she has.
Then I said, "okay, since you don't have the money, go and see my management, because I don't have the right to reduce the price for you."
Aha!
That was how we talked.
We went on and on talking.
Until the lady went to meet the management.
Then they reduced the price for her.
She tried.
When they finished the hair, she liked it.
Is that so?
Now she was li-... behaving as if she were a big celebrity.
She was bringing her nails here, I saw her shouting hallelujah.
She was... she was doing selfies, Skyping, everything, everything.
That girl... that lady was no good at all.
That's how it all came to an end.
Hm.
So as it is now, the manager knew.
I also told her, "okay, you don't have enought money, do the one you can afford, do the one that you can afford."
Then she said no, she's not doing that; the one she wants is the one she needs to do.
Then management told her we don't do manicures for eight hundred in this shop.
That was how she agreed to pay two thousand naira.
Hm!
Even the two thousand as well, she said she didn't have enough money and she'd come back and pay the balance.
You can imagine.
That was how she sat down... sat down to finish the nails.
Aha!
When I finished the nails, I was wondering where the girl came from.
So I asked her, "sister, excuse me, where are you from?"
She said she was from Ibadan.
I said "aha! It's a shame! It's a shame!"
Haha.
She said...
I said "which part of Ibadan?"
Ibadan!
She said ah.
She said it's a kind of...
Challenge, all those uh... Molete people.
She, she said a kind of... a kind of name that I just don't...
I just didn't...
Or is it Iwo road?
All, all those people are bush people.
You should see the kind of fake nails she was wearing.
Haha!
She has bleached [her skin] completely.
Hey, I can imagine.
Her hands were bony!
She was like uh... coke and fanta.
Jesus!
No, it was like burnt plantain.
You know like burnt plantain, that's what her hand is like.
Hmhm!
Oh babe, that's why I said look at this girl!
Haha!
I wanted to take a picture of her nails.
That was how she told me that ah, I should not take a picture of her nails.
She said if I shoot her nails, her knuckles will be showing.
I now said "babe, I'm taking a picture of the nails because if I don't, my customers that are coming won't see my work."
That was how she...
I told her not to worry because my phone, the kind of camera I have on my phone, the camera will clear all the knuckles, all the all the defects that she has on her hand.
All the defects on the nails.
So she agreed.
I finished and she posted it on Instagram, Facebook, Whatsapp, everywhere.
Just look at the nails!
She was just feeling proud that day.
Babe, it's no small thing.
So her friend said she liked the nails.
Hm!
Then she came to do it.
Her, she didn't have any money, so I should also do the manicure for eight hundreed naira for that one, that day.
Eight hundred?
She can't agree to... mstchew!
mstchew!
Please!
A manicure that we do for one thousand five hundred I did for her eight hundred!
Just to maintain a relationship with the customers, mstchew.
Hm!
Man, that's how the matter is.
It's a shame!
So, as it is now, the thing has...
Management told her... told me that she had come before!
So, that was how she kept bargaining.
In fact, the day she came to fix her hair, that was how she paid.
Hm!
She can haggle, she is the best haggler in Africa!
As if!
Paying five hundred naira for a haircut!
Can you imagine?
They say that in Lagos, that under a bridge, they do hairdressing for five hundred.
Aha!
Can you imagine?
What kind of girls are those?
They are Jews.
Ah!
You know that those Jew girls, they are the ones who pretend they are Jews.
Jews?
They'll pretend they're city girls so that you know, when they enter a big place like this, they'll know that they're babes.
They won't know that nothing can fix them.
Nothing can fix them.
One naira won't fix their butts like this!
Mstchew, hm!
My name is Bukola Ayaniyi.
I'm an authority in soap making.
I make soap because I don't wanna steal, and I don't wanna be a liability to my husband.
I'm just making the soap, I'm not the one who invented the soap making process.
A long time ago, I had a shop where I sold basic products.
But later on, things went bad.
And myself, I can't just sit idle.
That's why one of my friends whose name is Mama Funmi (she is my best friend)... so she told me that her brother was taught how to make soap in their church.
So since he was taught about it, he gave me the manual to read.
When I finished reading it, I went to buy the ingredients.
So the ingredients for making soap starts with sulphuric acid.
The second one is Texapon.
The third one is s-... uh... caustic soda.
The fourth one is ST-... STPP.
Soda ash, nitrosol, perfume, liquid gel, or foam booster, or formalin, with colour, and perfume.
That was how I started mixing soap.
And I thank God that even though I haven't had as much business I wanted, at least I'm putting some bread on the table for my children.
And I don't...
That my clothes won't get dirty and the whole house won't be smelling.
I wash as I like.
My children wash too.
We're clean.
Even my scent, my scent is fantastic because I add an exotic perfume to it.
The perfumes I put into it range from Ambi Pur.
I put in lemon fruit, I put in uh... flavor, and some other perfumes.
This means if anyone opens up my soap and sniffs it, they will ti-... they will know it's a good one.
And my soap doesn't ruin clothes, it doesn't wash the color off clothes, it makes clothes better.
You can wash ankara and jeans with it.
You can wash any kind of clothing with my soap.
And I make it in different colors.
I make it in lemon, pink, blue, and green, so that it will entice my customers.
Or if they see it... ah, what color is this one?
Sometimes I even use orange.
That's it!
So soap making is a good business!
Any woman who doesn't want her husband to mistreat her all around the house should find herself a bit of work... she should do something.
It's not good to be idle.
That's it!
First of all, if I want to do like fifty liters, I will buy two liters of sulfuric acid.
And the two liters go for one thousand, eight hundred naira.
A liter is nine hundred.
I will buy Texapon for six hundred naira.
When I have bought all those things, I will...
First of all, I will mix sulfuric acid with Texapon.
I will stir the mixture very well, so that everything will dissolve.
Because sulfuric acid is a very strong acid.
So when I have stirred it very well, in order to dissolve it...
Because for fifty liters of soap, I will use ten spoons of caustic soda.
I will soak it in three liters of water.
So when it has dissolved completely, I will pour it in.
When I have poured it in with, with the stuff I've mixed earlier (that sulfuric acid, and Texapon), I will pour the caustic soda into it.
I will stir it very well.
In fact, as you are stirring it, you will notice smoke coming off of it because the mixture is really hot.
So afterwards, I will also mix in my soda ash.
I will pour it into three liters of water.
I will mix that too.
When it has dissolved completely, I will pour it in.
I'll stir it very well.
After that sulfuric... after uh... the soda ash, I will add the STP-... STPP.
I will put that into three liters of water because I don't like my soap to be watery.
So when I've done all that... all those things, then I'll add three liters of water at intervals till it gets to the uh... perfume.
When I've mixed everything in that order, if the water doesn't get to the measurement I wanted, I can add more water to it because if the soap is really thick, people will buy it.
If it's too watery, it won't lather very well.
So that's how I do mine.
And I thank God for my life because I am not a liability to my husband.
People are buying it!
Even this sister of mine, she uses my soap to wash clothes.
All the people in my compound buy soap from me.
They are buying it.
Even the people on the street, they buy it because they know that my soap okay.
I can bring out one for you to smell.
The thing is really great.
You can use it to wash plates; you can use it to wash clothes, you can use it to wash your toilet, mop your kitchen.
Anywhere, anywhere; you can use it for anything, anything.
Nothing wrong with it.
No problems at all.
So, I am alright.
Okay.
Good, it's good.
Let me talk as a m-... about my life as a mother now as uh... motherhood.
I just gave birth uh... like seven months ago.
Kai, when I was pregnant, it was not easy at all.
Pregnant woman go through some tough times, man!
If I don't throw up today, if I don't get dizzy...
Mtschew, it was not easy at all, at all, man!
At that time uh... ah that was how, any...
I couldn't do anything.
My husband felt really bad for me.
He was the one helping me out with some things.
Man, all our mothers work really hard.
They are really working hard.
But ever since I gave birth... immediately after I gave birth, look at me feeling so great.
Everything's f-... uh, it's like I was never pregnant.
Everything's great now.
All the headache, everything, everything, all the sickness just stopped, okay?
I said, "uh, is this how it is?"
So now that we had the kid, the drama started.
Yes now, okay you had a kid.
The baby, as I f-... gave birth to her, for f- two days, I did not see the baby.
Because it came early.
The baby came earlier than expected.
So they kept her for... almost a week.
When I finally saw the baby, see, the tiny thing looked small.
Then I started breastfeeding.
Ah, waking up in the night is another job.
Another big job indeed.
I was just waking at night, man.
Sometimes... my mother was alive at the time, she would help me carry her a little.
My husband would also carry her a while, until, until...
Because I was only feeding her with breastmilk.
I didn't give her any...
I didn't give her any baby formula.
So little by little, by the third month, she was waking up less at night.
I was still...
I was still just giving her food, breastmilk.
I wasn't giving her any formula.
When she was six months old, ehen.
When we got to the sixth month, she stopped taking breastmilk.
One day, I tested her by giving her baby food.
She took it.
I said ah.
Okay!
So after some time, she started taking breastmilk again.
So she was eating, sleeping and everything.
That was how we went on, going bit by bit.
But even up until now, she still wakes up in the middle of the night, she still wakes up.
But her hair has grown.
She's a girl.
So I have started plaiting her hair little by little, little by little, and I'm buying clothes.
We take pictures.
The girl, she likes to play with phones.
Phones, laptops, television, all those things attract her.
I don't know if she wants to do... if she wants to go into the entertainment industry or something.
I don't know.
We never know, but...
Well, she has not started talking, but we play, we laugh.
We are just...
We are just fine.
We are just fine, enjoying.
After my mom stayed with me for one month, she left.
Me and my husband started doing it little by little, little by little, together.
In fact, I've started working now.
So I have started taking her to daycare.
So at least, sometimes, me too... I'll say I am going on, on break.
When she goes to daycare, I'll be able to work.
I come back to the house in the afternoon.
In the evening, we continue as usual.
Me, I work for the local government.
I'm a civil servant.
Uh... so there in the local government, if I...
But the good thing is that since I gave birth, the government has a procedure.
I gave birth, I got uh...
I was on maternity leave for three months.
I was away for three months.
When I came back, three months... for those three months now, immediately I resumed, if others finish by four o' clock, they let me finish by two o' clock.
So I finish on time, go get my child, and head home.
So this arrangement of two o' clock will go f-... will go on for six months.
After six months, I will start working again.
So that government procedure is good.
My child will be almost a year old before I start working fully.
So she will be very strong, like that.
Even those three months they gave us...
But we're still praying that they extend this uh... leave as uh... the doctors... the hospitals say we should breastfeed exclusively for six months.
So if they can extend this uh... leave to a period of six months, it will be better because even that time... well, God has helped me.
There's a daycare next to my office.
I take my kids there.
So while I'm here at work, I'll go feed her, go fin-... so that I will be able to do this uh, six months ehn.. six months full t-... uh mtschew, exclusively like they recommend.
But some people won't be able to do it.
They won't be able to do it, due to their work.
It... those who work with private organisations, are the ones I pity the most.
But ev-...
Some people... even some government workers, cannot do it if there's no daycare in the office.
My saving grace is the fact that there's a daycare in my office.
If I hadn't had a daycare in my office, it wouldn't have been easy.
But that's what helped me, really, so I've been able to do it.
The child has grown now.
Now, she eats.
So everything is alright.
Ehn... now in the office, as I am, it is...
What I do is kind of like documentation work.
Ehn.
When the ones who go out on assignment come back, I will ev...
Or maybe... let's say I'm in charge of the staff, ehen what the staff does... people who go for training, who come back.
It's administrative work.
I colllect documents.
People are...
Ah when they write application letters, they forward them to me before I take them to my boss who will then pass them to...
Everything.
Even if people want to see...
If people want to do... maybe... like collaboration (sometimes, all these NYSC [National Youth Service Corps] students, they come, wanting to do some work for our Local Government now), they will write their application letters.
I will be the one to process it.
I will be the one to forward it... to go and give it to my boss.
Then the boss will check it before...
Even when the boss wants to reply, I will still be the one to still...
He will still channel the thing through me, then I will give the person the reply.
Whether he gets a favourable letter or whether the thing... the deal will not work out, I'll still be the one to pass... to tell them.
Even during promotion exercises and all these things, I am still the one who hands over the letters to the staff members.
This is what they've done.
I started working at uh... the University of Ibadan here.
I'm an electrician, which they call onise ina.
I'm working there.
I've served...
I almost uh...
At least, I'm up to uh... thirty five, or thirty four years in service now.
The work I'm doing, I like it even though it's a dangerous job, it's the li-... work.
But I still like it because I'm good at it.
So I've been doing the work very well.
No problem.
Uh... everything we're doing here (we lay cables, we do wiring, we wire homes), when the university gets electricity, we're the ones who do it.
We do m-... we mount uh... tre-... transformer, we mount RI-... RMU.
Lots, lots of things, that's what we are uh... using.
We lay cables, but when we want to lay cables (that big one, the cable, if you carry it, it's a big one), we will lay it in a gutter which they dig for us.
After that, we will install lights.
The lights make everyone cheer.
Because they know we've finished.
But it's dangerous work for a novice!
But a person who's sure he's mastered it, he'll concentrate on what he's doing.
By then, even though the university doesn't pay us that much for the work we're doing, we know that we're still working.
We're still doing it.
And uh... there are a lot of people with us here.
We have uh... cable dressing, cable jointer section, we have overhead, we have uh... streetlights, we have the people doing wiring for houses.
But ours is cable jointers.
We are the ones who bring RMU, we are the ones who mount uh... transformers in the university.
Every high, high tension that we do, it's our section that's doing it.
We're the ones doing everything.
Apart from that, we can do house wiring.
But in our own section here, it's only the laying of cables, connection of transformers, connection of uh... RMU.
That’s all we're doing in our own section here.
In this section, at least, we have three sections... two... or two.
Uh... there is rewinding.
Oh uh...
We should...
We have ones who are re-... repairing transformers, we ones who connect transformers.
But in our section here, I am the station head, I am the overall boss in this section, who runs this place.
We're the ones who mount all these places.
We have...
If an... if they bring a form saying that there... it... see, there is a pro-... problem there, he will bring the form, we will fill it out, we will pass it on to our overall boss who will go and do the wor-... send us to s-... to go out, to uh... go and do the work.
That's how we do it here.
For any other problem that comes up, first of all you'll fill out papers stating that there's a problem in this section, they want them... these people to come and do the repairs, before we can go.
It's because the boss has given instructions that we should not pass... go beyond his... our boundaries.
We're the ones doing all these things.
Uh... those who are under me, we're at least... we are... we're up to ten, or fifteen.
We have uh... ones who do nights, afternoons, and mornings.
That is how we do... divided them up to do the work.
Those s-... the people who are on night shift now, they were here early in the morning.
They're here with us.
Some people, they are regular.
Regular, is what this...
That's how we do it here.
We come everyday.
No shifting for that group of people.
The ones on morning shift, they'll come in the morning.
When it's two o'clock, they'll leave work.
They go back to their place to s-... sleep.
But the ones on the afternoon shift will come back by two.
They will close by nine.
After nine, the ones who do... are on the night shift, they will take over for them from... to, to the other day, the second day... morning, because before the morning, people will come to take over for them.
That is how we do our work here.
No.
We don’t collect money!
We only collect our salary here which yeah, the Federal Government gives us.
If we go to work in a house, for instance in your house, we will not collect payment from you.
Because it is our pol-... nai-... du-... call... duty to do the work for you.
He doesn’t collect money, he doesn’t collect money.
The only thing we collect... we say if you say we... uh... the work which we did for you, that, it, it pleases you, you will say, "here, go and buy some soft drinks", if for instance you gave ten naira, we will take it uh... happily, collect it from you and pray for God to bless you and make you very wealthy.
That is how we do it here.
We don’t collect money.
Anybody who comes here, we do our own services for them.
Thank God for today!
My name is Titi Ade.
I uh... I married...
Some years ago, I married a soldier.
I live in the barracks.
We lived in the northern part of Nigeria before.
We lived in Jos, we lived in Bauchi.
From Bauchi to Jos, from Jos to Lagos.
As we left Lagos, we came to Ibadan.
I am...
My church which I'm going to is Mountain of Fire and Miracle Ministry, South West Two, Ojoo.
Everything happening in Nigeria, everything is in God's hands.
Let's just leave everything to God.
Because like our soldiers, they have killed a lot of them.
Many of the women... many women in the barracks now, they are widows.
They don’t have of... husbands.
Some of them, they are very young, some with one child, some with two children, and so on like that.
And we are still praying.
May God just help us with the problem of Boko Haram which is killing our soldiers, and some innocent uh... people.
We are still praying.
May God just help us.
The Boko Haram problem is here.
We are... we...
Before that... uh... before the food shortages came again; children... there's no money to go to school.
No school fees, no food.
We're just managing things.
The things we bought last week, if you want to buy them today, you will buy it...
We, we, we...
If you bought it last week for two hundred naira, like today, if you want to buy it, they will say it is five hundred.
What are we in for?
So it's only God, he's the one who will help us.
Let's keep praying, and let's pray for our president.
May he... may he be well.
May he remain in good health.
Because they said he is... he is sick now.
We don’t know his condition.
May God let him get well again so that everything will go well for Nigeria.
So we thank God for everything.
We thank God.
Because this nation we're in, if someone rules it today, we'll say he is the best.
If another one comes in and we're happy he's come to power, we will be complaining.
You will not bring up another sy-... uh... another... his own system which will make Nigeria... which, which will make everything harder for the people of Nigeria.
So may God just help us.
Because everything... we don’t know where we are going in Nigeria.
We just don’t know.
Look at the children now.
They go to school, we borrow money from cooperatives!
We struggle, send the children mo-... uh... to school, they come back from... they graduate from university, but no employment.
Nothing, nothing.
What are we in for?
What do we, as Nigerians, want to do now?
No good jobs.
Uh... no drugs in our hospitals.
If you go to the hospitals now, when you are sick, you go to the hospital, the most effective drug on the list, is the one that will be... is the one that will be the most expensive.
They will say, you should o-... no... go and buy it.
Tomorrow, they'll say they're on strike.
Uh... doctors, they're not working.
Sick people are in beds.
No drugs, no treatment.
Another death will happen again.
So may God just help us.
Everything is fucked.
Nigeria is fucked.
It's fucked.
I just pity the new born children that we're giving birth to now.
Because we don’t understand their future.
It's only God, he's the one who'll help us.
It's serious.
Osas, your wedding you're preparing for, I... I'm looking forward to it.
Uh... auntie, it's not easy.
This is seriously keeping me up at night.
Me, I'm not worried because I'm just looking forward to that day so I can dance.
I can't even sleep.
And as it is, me, I like my bride, the girl's so fine.
Hm.
Her character, she and I just connected the first day I saw her.
That's how you just forgot your boy.
Ah, I forgot my boy.
You've gotten a new daughter.
You don't see?
Uhuh!
You didn't see the attraction is that since I've gotten my daughter now, it's the daughter that fills... rules the house.
There is no problem.
Toh!
Because all of you, by the time you get married, you'll forget everything, but if I have a daughter I get along with, I can come to her house anytime.
Auntie, I don't believe we'll forget home.
Don't disturb me.
Ah!
That's how men behave.
When you've concentrated your wife... on your wife, you'll have forgotten everything.
How?
No, no, no, no.
I've had brothers that haven't forgotten our home.
They're still there, they're still in the house.
Uhuh, but the truth is that when you look at what they're doing and what their wives do, their wives, they are stronger.
Then, that's right.
And you agree that the house, it's the woman that takes care of it, right?
Haha, that's it.
Yeah!
It's the woman that takes care of it.
You know... you'll just be there saying that it's you that's the head.
That's right.
But auntie, that's not the issue.
The major issue is the wedding preparation.
Ah!
What preparation?
It's you... is it not you who wants to bring a wife to the house?
Uh... sure I want to bring a wife to the house but, auntie, the thing uh... is feeding off my money.
Ehe, so, it's you that will...
It's good.
Because when you know that something is precious, no matter the amount, it will not disturb you.
As it is now, with the reccession, we don't even have the money, that's the problem.
Aha, you don't have to use a lot of money.
Aha!
Auntie, how can you tell me that I don't need to?
You wanna come and eat?
I'll come and eat.
Even if I don't eat, there is no problem.
People want to come and eat.
Uhuh!
What will you do?
Won't I provide food for them?
What's there?
Corn isn't easy.
Hm.
Just cook tuwo.
Haha, tuwo will be plenty.
Auntie, you go to market.
You know how much corn is in the market now.
I know!
Uhuh!
And the thing is that, wu-... No matter how much you spend on the wedding, the truth is that people will still insist that they didn't get food to eat.
Uh... but there are major things that I need to do.
Then that's to say you're supposed to plan ahead.
Auntie, even buying her wedding gown is money, getting my own suit is money.
It's true, it's true.
There's food.
But you have an old suit?
You can take it to the dry cleaner.
Uhuh!
You know as women... you know how you are.
If it's not your color, you won't agree.
I have black.
Let me use black, she didn't agree.
Uhuh, it's her day.
It has to.
Alright, it's her day.
That's where the money issue will be involved.
But you know that... but you know that the truth is that, if you look at our own culture closely, those things are not necessary.
I have to get the color.
As we have borrowed the white man's culture...
But the women will not agree.
Women will not agree.
You know what?
If you change your mind now and say I don't have this and I'm not getting married, she will come back.
Uh... you think so auntie?
Haha, yes now haha.
Haha.
I don't think... I don't think so.
Lit-...
Aha!
If she really likes you, she will come.
I don't think so, I don't think so.
She will come because...
Oh, women always check that okay it's their day, they need to be happy that day.
Because...
Uhuh!
So, just do what they want.
Uhuh!
But what color did she choose?
She chose uh... royal blue, lilac and...
I like that color.
No wonder she and I connected very well because royal blue is one of my favorite colors.
Royal blue is my color too.
It's Chelsea, but I don't have a royal, royal blue suit.
I have to wear... I have to go and find it in the market.
Hm.
You can buy and sew it.
You don't have to buy an ori-... a ready-made.
Ah, sewing will be more expensive auntie.
Alright, ready made will be okay.
Even getting the material...
That's not a problem.
I know when you talked about food, in this part of our culture, it's not just you that'll bring food that day.
People will contribute, people will donate.
The only thing is that you'll plan based on your own budget so that if they add to it, it's an addition.
Alright, auntie, so far as it is, nobody is bringing anything.
They will.
When the time is close, you will see.
When?
You'll see.
This, we are talking um... about a month's time.
Me, I'm telling you that my wedding uh... my family just left me to do whatever I wanted.
Two weeks before the wedding, that was when they made up their mind.
Because there was a time that I said please no, I don't want visitors; no, I don't want cards; no, it's only three people; it's only ten people.
They didn't say a thing to me.
It was two weeks before the wedding that my sister said look, this wedding is not your own, it's the whole family's.
Because, in our own culture, a wedding is not just for you, it's for the family.
Because people that don't know you will come because they know your mother, they know your sister, they know your brother, they know your uncle.
All these people will come for that wedding.
Her own family too, it's the same thing.
So, they will say, "this wedding is not just for you."
They'll just let you do what you want to do.
When you get to that stage, when you stop, they will add.
Ah!
And the truth about a wedding is what you don't have, don't go and borrow.
Auntie, I don't want to depend on that.
I know that people will...
No, I didn't say you will depend on that.
Plan according to your budget.
What they will bring is an addition.
That's right, that's right.
I know that it's difficult.
X.
It's not easy.
I'll tell you that man, this thing is keeping me up at night.
By the time X.
X.
Don't worry, haha.
Two AM, that's when I'll just wake up and be thinking, thinking what... what I have not set on the ground and what I have not set on...
As in, the thing is making me feel like I haven't even done anything.
About everything that I've done.
I have advised you to make a checklist.
I will still...
I have, auntie.
Hm.
I have the checkli-... uh... check uh... this thing... list.
If I'm sleeping, I'll just wake up and be feeling like okay, there is something I didn't write on this list.
It's the joy.
So that they... after the wedding, you'll just say, "is that it?"
Hm.
Auntie, I like to sleep.
Haha
Anything that will disturb my sleep, I don't like it.
For my kind of mechanic, for instance, when you call me to say your car broke down on the road, first I'll come with my plier and screwdriver.
When I get there, first of all, I'll check "do you have fuel in the car?"
If there's fuel in your car, I'll ask, "before the car broke down, the mo-... will, will... did the car show any signs?"
"Yes or no?"
If you give me an answer, I'll know what to do based on your response.
If, if the car gave you some signs... maybe you can tell me that the car was jerking.
I will just say it's the fuel pump.
Mstchew!
From there, I'll look inside your car, open the seats at the back, loosen the... where the pump is and bring it out and fix it.
In some cars, becoming...
The fuel pump is underneath.
Until I remove the tank, bring it out, loosen it and wash the... this, this thing, then I will come and tell you that you should give me some money since... so that I can go to the... buy some at the fuel pump.
When you call to tell me that your car is jerking... the car is jerking, jerking, jerking, first I'll come and loosen your car's plug.
The plug is in the middle of the engine.
It's inside the top cylinder.
I'll loosen it.
Some of the plugs use sixteen while some use twenty one.
I'll loosen it, and the, the plug ignites the car's engine.
It powers up the car when the fuel circulates under the top cylinder.
The piston starts taking the fuel up while the plug powers it up.
At the same time, there's a certain fire in the middle of the engine which we call the breaking fire.
Now the engine is getting hot.
If you put your hand under the car, you can feel that the engine is hot.
And when you call to tell me that you... your feels like it's full when you are driving, I know that can only be the shaft, or the tie rod.
I pick up my tools, go there and take off the shaft, fix it, buy grease and some, some parts for the materials.
I will come and fix it, buy hosing, and the rest.
And when you call me to say your car... you know what's wrong with your car, you hear something... a sound when you're moving, I will come to you.
You bring your car here, I'll take the jack, raise up the side where the noise is coming from.
If you raise up the side, then I will check, check, check, check.
Maybe there's a plate, or something wrong has broken, or something that, that has gone wrong.
So from there, I'll tell you what is wrong with your car.
And then, you will give me money to go and buy the parts I will need.
And when you call to tell me your car just... you kicked the car but it refused to start, there are two things.
Either the battery, or the key starter.
Either the key starter, or the battery.
When you call me...
Or fuel.
Sorry, three things.
Or fuel.
From there, we will figure out how to handle the issue.
When you call me to say your car is overheating when you're moving, you noticed that your car got hot, I only know that maybe your fan is not working, maybe the gasket of your car's top cylinder's has burnt, maybe the temperature switch is not set.
Something like that.
Or when you call me to say your car is acting up, it doesn't idle smoothly... if it uses a carburetor, I'll say I'll loosen the carburetor and service it.
Or if it is an injector, I will loosen the injector, buy.
There's something we call carburetor cleaner.
I will buy it, and come and...
That stuff, it cleans out the dirt which is in the dust inside.
It cleans it, and all that.
And when you say you just came...
Imagine you just came here and said, "hey, here's my car!"
It's just acting up.
I was... I was driving and it's just acting up.
You don't know what's wrong.
Just heard the sound puh, puh, puh, puh, puh, puh, puh, puh.
If I go there, if you load your gear, maybe, it's that the engine seat (mount) is worn out, or the engine is not... is not set right, or the idling, or something like that.
There are a lot of things about the mechanics' job that if you come and tell me that your car has a problem...
You see, when I wanted to start this thing, well, a friend talked me into it.
He said I should buy this thing.
This thing is good.
Well, at the time he asked me to buy it, I didn't have any money.
Then he caught one and he said he should give it to me.
I said... he said w-... I should go and put it in my house.
I did what he said.
God provided money and I bought a male.
Then I put it in.
They started giving me eggs.
Like...
They gave me eggs, like eight eggs.
They gave me more, like three.
It remains...
It laid ten eggs.
This one, that's the one.
Again, I was... little by little.
I'm fine.
A dog that was in this house, it ate two of my turkeys.
I was sleeping, then I started hearing them fight violently.
I came outside.
I saw the dog, it ran that way.
I went after it but I did not catch it.
The one it actually came to eat, I bought them for four thousand each.
The male... the male, I bought it for seven thousand.
Well, it ate it.
The one that eventually died, she gave me four eggs.
Then I added the eggs to that one.
Well.
If they want to hatch the eggs, they will sit on the eggs for around thirty five days.
Well.
Now, they are done brooding.
This one here, she hatched her eggs.
She hatched ten of her eggs.
Well, I don't have money, so I s-... sold them for five hundred naira each.
I sold nine.
Well.
Eventually now, yesterday, I came back in the night and I saw this one.
They have moved... given me chicks.
So I caged them up and I went out to buy them food.
Then I fed them.
Uh... the food uh... this is the food.
The food.
Food, right?
Right!
That's the food.
Now, by the time I got back, I had just two hundred [naira] with me.
I went for one hundred naira's worth.
I gave the, the big one, I served it to them.
And then, I went out to buy a Fitila lantern.
And I put it there.
<hau> Shi, ke nan <hau>.
Eh.
They eat rice, Indomie, like rice pudding, yams, bread.
Now, if I get... if I buy two... three fifty naira's worth of loaves of bread, they'll eat it.
Quickly, now, now, now.
That's if it's in the daytime.
Right now, I have bread, which I have come to give, give them.
Or should I take the bread, right.
Should I bring it, so you see it, well.
They are over there, living off me.
If I have money, they will eat meals worth five hundred, courtesy of me.
No problem.
If sometimes I don't have money, they will... they will be calm.
Well, did you see?
Yes.
They're a kind of security.
Now, if you come in... if you come in the house, it will be making sounds like kwulukwulukwuluu.
Kwulukwulukwuluu.
Kwulukwulukwuluu.
Why won't I report it?
Well, did you see?
Now if I...
Even if I am not around, if you come in, it will be doing this.
Even the people outside, they will come in.
Look, what is wrong with the, th-... this thing?
Correct!
Did you see?
If they see a snake, they will kill it.
If they see a snake, they will kill it.
Even though rats, they come out, they will go after it, and kill it.
Now if they are sleeping, look at the place where they kill it, that veranda.
Correct!
Rain does not bother them at all.
As long as this thing on their heads has been finished, the rain doesn't disturb them in any way.
Now myself, I don't have a cage at the moment.
It's outside they sleep.
Now this one, it's inside the room I will keep it.
Correct!
<hau> Ah gaskiya dai! <hau>
Ah, the meat is delicious!
Honestly, the meat is delicious.
Now you see this one, if I want to sell it, I'll get around seven thousand, or eigth thousand.
If it's during the Christmas season, well, I can get around ten thousand.
But uh... the female... it won't be more than four thousand... three thousand five hundred.
Well, but it's the male...
The male is very big.
Correct, they don't like the female.
They like the male very much.
If they want to eat over there, the, the male has so much meat.
This one, no meat.
Now, I have six.
Six uh... with that one.
The dog has eaten one.
The dog has eaten one.
Why won't I report it?
I won't tell them so they might pay me.
I just forgot about it.
Okay, my name is Bassey.
People call me Skata.
Um... I like to drink uh... beer, but not all beers.
I like to drink uh... Stout, but today, I just decided to drink uh... Gulder.
We have uh... Stout, we have Gulder, we have uh... Origin, we have uh... Star, we have uh... different brands of beer.
But I like drinking Stout because...
The, the reason I like drinking Stout is because Stout doesn't...
When you drink Stout, you don't need to go piss, piss all the time.
Because... and it will also keep your belly full.
If you want to go a long way, you don't need to go to the bathroom every now and then.
Stout will keep your belly nice and full.
That's why I like Stout.
But uh... many people prefer the other brands as well.
And I like to come to this uh... place because their drinks are not expensive.
You will go to some places and they will tell you the Stout is four fifty a bottle... five hundred.
But in this place, you can buy it for three thou-... three hundred and fifty naira here, and drink.
And beer also, though it's good, it's not very good for young people... for children.
Someone who has... who is not uh... eighteen years or older yet is not supposed to be drinking beer.
Because if they start drinking beer, it will affect them negatively.
They won't behave well at home.
Even in school, they won't concentrate.
So it's good for someone to be over eighteen before they can start drinking uh... beer.
But beer is very good because it will help you.
It will make you know... I mean feel bold.
It will make you feel bold at all times.
Apart from that, I also come in here to eat, most of the times because here, their food is good.
It's uh... hygenic.
It's clean.
They prepare it... they cook it the way everybody likes it.
They are from Calabar.
As we all know, Calabar people are the ones who know the most about how to cook.
So I always come here to eat with them.
They have... they've got edikaikon here, they have epankwokwo, the have garri (eba), and soup; they have uh...
About the soup, they have uh... afiaifere, ebot; they have uh... otong, they have uh... ogkuoafan, they have uh...
At times, they also have diedesi here, they have iwuhabia, they have ozobuko.
In fact, they have all kinds of food here.
They also have pepper soup.
They have uh... cowtail pepper soup, they have fish pepper soup too.
So everything is here.
They have everything someone can eat and enjoy here.
Uh... myself, most of the times... a lot of the time when I come here, I, I like to eat afiafherebo, yeah, and auzomahbiah.
For auzomahbiah, they prepare it with uh... yam.
They pound the yam.
The whites call it pounded yam.
But with afihafereboh, they add uh... goat meat in it, and they prepare it in such a way that they don't put any...
They cook it in the... in the way where they don't add vegetable leaves to it.
The soup is peer... pure white.
Just white like that.
I have finished now.
This is a very short story that's coming your way on ninety five point one, Wazobia FM on this fifth day in June twenty seventeen.
Alright, listen carefully so you can hear the big news.
Yesterday, the Federal Government said they will not hesitate to expose people whose work is... whose work is to spread fake news all over the country.
And they will bring them to justice.
The Senate president, Doctor Bukola Saraki, announced to the house that it will not be appropriate for the politicians who are currently in office to abandon their offices and duties in pursuit of victory in the upcoming twenty nineteen elections.
The Senator representing Ogun East, Buruji Kashamu, said he's not happy at all that Ekiti State Governor, Ayodele Fayose, is saying that President Mohammadu Buhari should drop his letter of resignation.
The National Assembly has declared that it's not possible... that the Senate has nothing to do with the story circulating around that the pump price of petrol will increse in... by five naira, saying they did not even discuss anything like that.
The Kogi State Governor, Yahaya Bello's name has, like magic, disappeared from the voters register after he was accused of registering twice.
The House of Representatives has given the Controller General of Nigeria Immigration Service, also known as NIS, Muhamed Babandele, uh... till Wednesday to appear in the... before them or they will employ force again him.
The Federal Inland Revenue Service, also known as FR-... FRIS, has released what they call the six key electronic solution, also known as e-services, so as to make it easy for people to pay their taxes.
The Chief Justice of Nigeria... of Nigerian, also known as NJC, Justice Walter Onnoghen, has announced the appointment of Mrs Had-... Hadizatu Uwani Mustapha as the Chief Registrar of the Supreme Court.
The Lagos State Independent Electoral Commission, also known as LASIEC, has received the list of candidates for the All Progressive Congress, APC, to run for the seats of the Chairman and councillors in next month's Local Government election.
Bad guys, robbers, have gone to the great beyond.
A bank agent withdrew two million naira from his account for the four Local Government areas in Ogun State.
In the white man's country.
Twelve people have been arrested by the Police for their involvement in the terror attack that occurred in London.
For buying and selling.
The way the Nigerian nai-... naira is appreciating these days will ensure that the Central Bank of Nigeria, also known as CBN, continues to monitor the financial market, which will encourage better results.
In entertainment news, our Nigerian rapper, Eva Alordiah...
My name is Edewoh.
Or the way it's called in my... in my area is Edewo.
Because uh... I'm a Delta boy; I'm Urhobo.
And uh... I come from a family of six, and I'm the fourth born, actually
But initally uh... while growing up, because it's... it's... it's... I was born in Lagos, you know, my mom and dad... we speak English there, mostly, because they wan-...
The whole idea of...
To know a kid who, who's educated, they're supposed to speak English really well.
So they started from when they were little.
English was the language they used... they, they... that they spoke to us in.
So, it also has its down sides because here as we speak, I can't speak my language.
Haha, something like that.
It's more like that.
And I... (you know then), I associated with people as I grew up, and I realized that people speak different languages.
It... it's like I'm an outcast in Lagos, where I stay.
You know, people speak different languages.
I figured, "ah, everyone's supposed to be speaking English."
"What language is this Pidgin that people are speaking?"
You know, so I started picking it up little by little, I started to learn to speak it little by little, but uh... you know that every time you go back to the house, you'll be expected to speak English.
So I couldn’t master the language.
You know, so, I started...
You know be-... um... because I used to act, I used to work at another radio station before, before I came to... before I came to Wazobia, so since I resumed in Wazobia, it's more like...
Okay then, since they, they employed me to speak English on Cool TV, because at that time... we had Cool TV at that time, so was I hired to speak English.
As d-... I... as I...
I still remember the way I perfomed in the audition, where, where my MD said, "now, speak Pidgin so we can hear how it'll sound."
That’s how I started.
He said no, no, no, no, no, no.
I should speak English because it's like my spoken English is better.
I said, "ah, there's a problem."
He said, "no, don't worry, don't worry, don't worry!"
He said that my spoken English was alright.
I should just stick to speaking English.
You know but as time went on, they hired me here, you know.
So I started working.
We were broadcasting in English, we were... we were... we, we were broadcasting in Pidgin.
Then, uh... there were some logistical issues, there were some technical issues.
So we merged Cool TV into Wa-... Wazobia.
Then, everybody had to speak Pidgin.
Me, I started wondering, "ah, the Pidgin language I've been running away from has caught up to me right here!"
That’s how I started, and I'm still here, and I'm growing.
Then I re-... uh... I realized that Pidgin is not a language that's meant for people who don't sa-... who aren't uh... intelligent.
It's for Nigerians who wanna communicate, who wanna reach as many people as possible.
Because since I don't speak my language now, I'm sure that if I go to Sapele, or Delta and I speak Pidgin, I'll be able to communicate with the people over there; but if I speak English, they'll be looking at me like, "ah, buddy, you should know that we don't speak that language here."
"We speak Uhrobo."
"Why don't you speak the language we understand?"
You know.
So... but I realized that Pidgin... anywhere I go... (because I can say that I've been to as many as eighteen States in this country), and everywhere I go, Pidgin paves the way for me.
Even if it's not the same type of Pidgin they speak in Warri, but it's the one of I-... I-... Ibadan or it's the one of Abuja, you will realise that if you speak any kind of Pidgin, it works.
People will still understand you, um... uh... what you're saying.
So that's why I appreciate this platform because since I've been here, I haven't been lost.
Because if I s-... if I get to a place where I'm expected to just speak English... I'm expected to be speaking... I'll be able to speak it and get along.
If I get to where I need to communicate with people (you know), where I have never been to before... if I want to go to a new place, I'll just be speaking Pidgin.
So I started building up my vocabulary... I started building it up.
Yes, I realized that even right here, we were... we, we, we treated Pidgin like an, an international language.
People will be...
Because myself, I, I organize shows where I... I... I... I go on the Red Carpet; I interview people.
So I'll dress really well, dress co-... in a fashionable way; in an official way; put on suits, everything.
And people will recognize my presence, saying "okay, he's from Wazobia, okay".
I want to tell the person, "we speak Pidgin, hope you don't mind."
They'll say, "oh, we'll be speaking Pidgin?"
I say yes.
They'll say uh... uh... you know, "oh yeah? But you know I don’t speak Pidgin very well."
I say, "Ma'am, you're a Nigerian, right?"
"You'll speak this language."
They said, "alright, alright, alright, let's try it out, let's try it out."
And (so far so good), it's like anytime people see me on the Red Carpet, they'll want me to interview them because they know that this guy will want to speak Pidgin, not in English which we'll be struggling to speak.
We'll just be free.
We'll relate so well, you know.
So from here, the thing started to build up.
There was awareness.
Everywhere we go, they say, "ah, it's wo-... Wazobia."
You speak the best Pidgin.
That’s your work.
You know, so it started building up its own uh... level of acceptance, across... everywhere.
There's no event we attend, even if the Pre-... President will be coming...
You know I... there was a day I... that I interviewed the Minister of Information.
That's uh... Lai Muhammed.
And he, he, he, he, he was asking me "how far now? So, how will it go?"
I, I said, "No Sir, we speak Pidgin here."
He said uh... "ah, alright, let's do it now, we are Nigerians, this is our language."
So we started speaking.
So pi-... people who interviewed him before me saw us laughing, cracking jokes, laughing... ah.
So they were wondering what I was telling him that, that was making him laugh so much... that was making the old man laugh so much.
What was I telling him?
I said "ah!"
Then I realized that, wow, this Pidgin brought us together.
We finished the interview.
He shook my hand and he said, "well done, young man; this is good, this one is... this is Nigerian."
I said, "yes sir, we’re doing our best, we’re doing our best."
So that’s the platform that uh... Wazobia has created for us, which made us realize that Pidgin English isn't just the language of the uneducated.
It's not a language that, that people that are...
Because they say it's for the people on the streets, it's for uh... the riffraff.
They're the ones who speak Pidgin.
But then you realize that it’s the only language that cuts across Nigeria without any issues.
Yo can go anywhere now if you... if you note... if there...
Some time... some time ago, when I... when I went to SA, I w-... I went to South Africa, and I was just... because it's... it's English, we believe everybody will understand.
But when I was there, I went into a mall and I saw a black guy.
Me and the guy, we were just chatting in Pidgin because we want... we didn't want... we didn't, didn't want anybody else hear what we were saying.
We were just talking in Pidgin, so the man asked me, "ah, man, how far? Are you a Nigerian?"
I said, "oh, you understand, right?"
Yes.
I said, "good, good, yeah, I'm Nigerian."
He said he himself is Nigerian, but he's been here for almost twelve years.
I said, "aha, hope you are... will you be coming back to Nigeria?"
So I said... he said he comes back every year, but he is w-... uh... working in South Africa.
I said "ah, good, good!"
So I realised that Pidgin, on its own, has gotten to a level where...
But I, I know that if, if, if given a little time now, it can get to the level where French uh... where English can be above it.
You know, it will create its own...
Because as it is, the Ghanaians have their own version of Pidgin, Nigerians have their own version of Pidgin, the people at Cotonou have theirs too.
You know, in the different countries... in the West African countries, they have their own different versions of Pidgin.
So we know that with time, it'll grow.
With time, it, it, it's growing.
So, well, basically, as... with the shows I organize, which give me the opportunity to interact with people every day, which take me to events in order to interview them... it's mostly in Pidgin.
Even if I have a white guy on the Red Carpet, I'll tell him, "hey man, we speak Pigdin here in Nigeria, will you like to try it?"
He'll say, "let's do this, let's do this", and he'll try to speak the language as best he can because he himself wants to identify with the, the language.
So that's, that’s the basic thing we, we do.
Okay, ladies and gentlemen, don't let this turn into a quarrel.
Today is Monday, and uh... we're already moving to the different departmental behaviors.
Uh... they say a bird in hand, is worth uh... so many b-... so many millions in the bush.
But I'm saying that it's the bird in the hand that's the real bird.
To avoid stories that touch the heart, "I was there", and "I shall be there" are two different things.
Are you with me?
Okay!
Frankly speaking, you see, uh... if, if you... when we... when we look like at life generally, we know that uh... someone is talking.
Your words, right, are different from people... other, other people's words.
And if you... if you want to equate your words with other people's words, it'll drive you crazy.
You alone will go crazy, you alone will be disgraced and you alone will destroy your authencity as a spoilt brat.
That's it.
Don't let it turn into a quarrel.
That's worse.
I was there and I shall be there are two different things.
Yes!
My mom's tummy is big and my mother is pregnant are two different things, to avoid stories that touch the heart.
What it is, we don’t know yet.
So that's how things stand.
Well, the Professor has spoken.
The discussiont goes on.
In fact, what are we saying?
I don't even know.
I'm just speaking my mind.
You understand, I'm just baring my mind, you understand.
People are just looking at me and they're wondering what I'm talking about.
But all talk is about conversation.
So as to not waste time, because if you say yours, I say mine.
All together, we call it a conversation.
Are you listening to me?
Many words are called multiple words.
That’s how it is.
Yes!
Um... uh... there's a saying goes "before you shoot a bird, will you get its mother to fly away?"
Just hold the mother and the child together, lock them somewhere and give them food to eat.
They'll cooperate with you at once.
Yes!
What do I want to say again?
Myself, I've forgotten.
Okay.
I'm MC Abi.
I'm a comedian, and we are saying so many things uh... on the language issue.
Uh... we are... we have different ways of referring to our father.
We call them 'pile', we call them uh... uh... 'pupsie', we call him 'old man'.
So one day, we got together and were praying for God to bless me!
It was, "God bless me."
So I was praying for God to change my life!
And eventually, God changed my life!
My brother, then my prayer changed.
I got to the house and I was praying, "Father, crucify my old man... crucify my old man."
That was how I prayed.
I didn't know that I was ta-... talking about my own flesh.
But my father heard me praying, and he thought I was talking about him.
"Crucify my old man... crucify my old man."
And so my pi-... my dad took his gun.
He pointed the gun at me saying, "You want to kill me, but instead, I'll be the first person to kill you in this town."
My brother, I spent two weeks in the hospital, with POP [Plaster of Paris] on my neck.
Limit my diction, limit my...
Furthermore, my, my speech became really distorted.
So, I was like that, and I let the issue rest.
Then, I graduated to the next point of expressional dimensional overture.
What did I say?
I don't know yet.
That's it.
I'm hustling, that's it.
MC Abi, that's my name, do not forget.
I'm here for your sake.
Yes!
Okay, the show I'm featuring on here is tagged, "On a Lighter Note with MC Abi."
We're talking about so many things happening in society from uh... or from different perspectives.
We're looking at life from the funny angles so that people won't be depressed.
You're always walking about with your arms up as if your have boils in your armpits.
You know, your... you will calm down.
You won't...
You know, you won't just squeeze your face like... as if your look reminds people of scarcity or austerity, or that people are on strike.
No!
We want us to be... everyone to calm down.
There's enough problems around already.
If you're having hot pepper soup while the weather is hot, you just want to make things worse.
Yes!
So what?
Everybody is trying to calm down, enjoy the groove, and enjoy what we are saying.
We talk about lots of things: fashion, life, general trending issues (you know), post... plus political matters... everything, you know.
We're just talking about it all.
So those are the things we talk about on the show known as "On a Lighter Note with MC Abi" and every day comes with its own gist.
For example, today is Proverbial, Proverbial Monday.
We talk about different proverbs, explaining them with real life issues.
We will tell you a proverb when people are...
When you hear it, naturaly, it is... it has a meaning, but we attach humor to it.
But they'll tell you that the downfall of a man is not the... not... it's not the end of his life.
I say it's a lie.
It depends on where the man falls from.
Yes, because if the man falls from a tall... a very high building, and hits the ground, that means he's dead.
That's... that's also known as "Call to Glory."
You are on your own, by yourself and with yourself.
Yes, and on Tuesdays, we do trendy things, those things in vogue, you know, the things going on in town, in your neighborhood (you know), what's the... what, what happens to be the new thing, the new level... the rave of the moment.
Then on Wednesdays, we talk about relationships, love matters, you know, you know...
You know, this issue of "I love you, I love you."
It looks... it’s turning into something else.
The last time I was told that... when a chick told me, "okay, if you know you really love me, would you die for me?", I warned her.
I said, "if you try it with me!"
"How will I die for you?"
"Don't you know that the love I have for you is an undying love?"
That's my escape route.
Because I can't die for anyone.
Yes!
So on Wednesdays... I mean Thursdays, we talk about past events which happened many years ago, in those days when we were... when we were really living, and we compare it to what we have now.
Like the poems we recite in those days, when we were in school; our poems are different from what they have now.
We recited poems like 'your canoe is out of shape, our canoe is in shape...'
Those were the kinds of poem we used to sing.
You know, a bonga, a bonga... we don't know it.
But nowadays, all those children... their... the package... it doesn’t work out well.
So we do... we compare the things of those days with the things of, of... (you know), now... nowadays.
How we go to school in those days... we put our slates under our armpits, we take...
Our slates were our... they were our modern-day day iPad, or tablet that we use now.
It's the slate.
We call it a blackboard.
A small one.
We wrote our ABCs and 123s on them.
We held them under our armpits and took them to school.
You know, we went schools for the sake of eating akara [bean cake] at that time.
That's the nursery schoool.
You know, different things.
We took water bottles with us.
All of us will drink with the same cup, from a big drum, at the long break period.
No.
For those long...
Then we'd go... we'd drop one kobo each into a bowl to eat bread and akara.
That was how we hustled back then.
I was in school at that time.
Then, l was asked to read the letters of the alphabet.
I sang the ABCs.
Then I got to a part in the song...
M U M E O P.
Ah, that was how I understood it.
So I took spu-... that was how I recited it.
I said M U M E scopew.
U R O skecity.
I said, "stop there!"
"Come and touch scopew on the board!"
I told the teacher that I was f-... I was sick.
Mama said if I'm sick, I shouldn't touch anything on the board.
That was how I escaped in school.
There were different things which helped in training us in schools.
Confusion.
Confusion.
The teacher gave me math and English exercises.
I failed.
I was provoked, and I went out to call my 'mile'.
Mile is another name for mom in Warri.
I went out to call my mom, and I told her, "come and see!"
Out of all the students in this school, they beat me saying that I don’t understand math and English.
My mom showed up.
A typical Urhobo woman.
She warned the teacher.
"Teacher, you whipped my child."
He said yes.
Uhuh?
She said "okay, why did you whip him?"
The teacher said, "because I gave him exercises in math and English, and he failed."
The teacher said...
My mom said, "do you even understand math?"
The teacher said, "of course, I'm the teacher."
My mum said "okay, if you understand math, then solve this one for me."
Mom mom gave the teacher a tough math exercise.
She said okay!
Some went to this place and some went to the other place.
How many remained?
For two minutes, the teacher was confused.
The teacher said, "lady, this isn't math."
My mum said, "come on, keep quiet!"
"You don't know that this is a simple math exercise."
"If some went to this place, and some went another other place, only some will remain?"
Oh boy!
For, for the next five uh... four years in school, the, the teacher didn't lay a finger on me.
If you dare raise a cane up to beat me, I'll just say that I'll get my mom to come after you.
I threatened the whole school with the news of my mom coming.
That was how I continued till I left... finished my primary school education.
So don't forget that.
(You know), we picked different things from our neighborhood.
Neighborhood... our neighborhood raised us.
You know that a frog's eye... you get things done because you're smart.
Not because you are the general overseer.
You don't understand?
Uh... people say that the monkey got smart because the trees are closely connected.
If the trees are far apart, you'll see that monkeys will go under, buy pure water, board a motorcycle, and use a handkerchief because the weather is hot [meaning that the monkey will apply wisdom].
Do you understand?
Don't let it cause a quarrel, my brothers and sisters, understand!
That means I have been speaking with you.
The conversation continues.
Kanapotelli zaga za.
What does that mean?
I dunno.
I don't even want to know.
Get out!
Your father!
"Your father" is a greeting.
It's not a curse!
Thank you!
